Ata
I
me
I will return soon
Give me soap.
A teeter-totter.
eraser
Abaca
seek out
When we cross , we detour around the deep and seek out the shallow so that we won't be swept away by the current into the deep pool.
If someone wants to get married, he will pursue it relentlessly. He will keep on discussing it with the father until he says yes.
The widow said, “I’m after  the house that Jeremy made but I don't yet have anything to use for payment.”
When it is clear what she is after, [then] she will ask for it.
The dog is digging because he is relentlessly pursuing a rat there in a hole in the ground. Someone says, “What is that dog after?
I am blocking that which he is relentlessly pursuing.
relentlessly pursue
persistent person
As for that person who is persistent, he keeps coming back until he is able to get that for which he was begging. It's as though the person from whom he is making a request is forced.
When the corn is still unripe, we harvest enough individual plants to cook.
One breaks/cuts off leaves when food will be served up on them.
When it rains, we break/cut off leaves for a head covering.
He cannot claim it until he has taken it.
The one who will claim the head is the one who carried the pig
The only one who will be designated to claim the head will be the one who carried the pig on his back.
They cut the meat up and divided it between themselves, and then they had the person who carried the pig on his back take the head for himself.
He claimed that it was his own saw.
Paul acknowledged his [role as] slave to Jesus because he had become his servant.
I have been claimed by that person; he regards me as his younger brother.
He claims relationships with those who aren't his [real] younger-siblings. He is always paling-around-like-family with us.
That person said, “I admit that it was really me who stole from you.”
Joaquin claims the residents of Maambago as his subjects.
acknowledge
claim
Joaquin claims the residents of Maambago as his subjects.
If there is a person who actually was the one who did wrong, and then he accused someone else because he was causing his theft to be attributed [to someone else].
That which he caused to be attributed to someone else, was used to cover up (lit. rub out) his fault.
An impression, mark, bruise or raised area such as is made by pressure against some object or a result of a blow.
impression
impression
swallow
Swallow the medicine.
The center/seed which cannot be swallowed like the the mango or the pangi, those are the only ones which can be sucked on.
Esophagus
Adam's apple
regret.
fireplace
stove
ashes
fireplace
bird
The abu-on bird, it's like the color (lit. design) of ashes. It's not so white; it's [color] is mixed.
dust
There is a lot of dust when there are many vehicles which pass by on the road that is not cemented.
The ashes will become dust if they are carried by the wind. Flour if we shake out the sack of flour, it will become dust because it becomes airborne.
heron
A white bird which dwells in a muddy area.
mold
nonsense
sift
Sift the flour.
strain
It doesn't work to sift something wet because it would stick.
A sieve
Flour, if it doesn't pass through a sieve, it will become lumpy.
even
If someone requests salt, even a little, he doesn't have any.
Even though there are difficulties in our life situations, yet we just trust them to God.
anyone
Anyone can pass through the airstrip.
fine
It would be great if the husband of Tuning knew how to make a rice granary, however, he doesn't
Doctora said, “How many weeks will you be at your home place?” Usì said, “Even so that's OK because I will return soon.”
anything
If someone collects payment for a horse but it has been sold on credit, the person who has gotten the horse can use anything whatever for payment.
No matter what I said, wouldn't agree to stay with her other daughter.
any number of items
It doesn’t matter how many there are
Even though it is small
It doesn't matter that it is small.
crayfish
race
Two people will race to return home.
The two people were racing.
That race each other is a game. They get in sacks and run. The one who is able to finish is the one who wins.
The horses are racing each other.
If two are going downriver and one gets ahead, the other will chase and catch up with the one which got ahead.
If there is someone from Maguimon who is leaving from Patil but he has left to return home, and there are others who have followed later who are returning to Maambago, they will say, “Usì, you will be inadvertently passed up.” The person from Maguimon will answer, “Nevermind. You just go on ahead.”
Two were racing to return to the house. One said, “If you happen to be beaten , you will be the one to fetch water.”
hip
All domesticated animals have hips but chickens don't because their legs are attached to (lit. are here on) their sides.
pierce
If someone is stabbed by a raider, the spear will pierce and go through
Push the fishhook through to the other side of his thumb.3To penetrate through, as a pain which goes through one's body from one side to another.
Uncle's pain penetrates from his chest to his back
If you have come in from outside and you experience a pain which penetrates, you have been affected by an evil spirit.
We are going back and forth while passing through the village
To be strong, or forceful, as an earthquake or an ocean wave.
The earthquake is strong.
The wave(s) are/were very strong.
When we were still children, we would throw a stone to the other side of the water who had the strongest throw.
The wind is getting stronger.
I swung the rope around three times and then it made a loud snapping sound.
It is thundering loudly.
Turn up
Speak louder so that the others can hear.
lightweight
My backpack is lightweight.
If we have many animals, our living situation becomes easier because we won't experience hardship.
The people living in that place feel unsafe; All of them will pack up and move at the same time because something is making [them] afraid.
Tirino said, “Those who don't feel unsafe, don't leave Kapugi. If  feel unsafe, leave together now for Maambao because there are warning of raiders for a while.”
sweet
That which turns into the agkud staple is buried in the ground for two days. It sours/forments but it is sweet.
inagkud, corn and rice are mixed together which will become agkud.
earthworm
pine
cedar tree
sugarcane
submerged just under the surface of the water
If many get on a raft, it will become submerged just under the surface of the water.
If the hollowed out portion of the boat is even with the water level , it has sunk just even with the water.
Inadequately cooked
When sweet potatoes are cooked, ig there is inadequate fuel, it will be hard; it will be hard because it is still raw.
lazy
A person in our place who is lazy, we call a lazy (lit. inadequately cooked person because there isn’t any work he knows how to do. He has ability but doesn’t use it.
corn
I will make a storage shelter for corn.
cornfield
clay
That clay soil is red and malleable. It is used to make clay pots.
take
A portion of my land was taken away [from me]. [He] chose a time that coincided with my absence.
He repeatedly takes away the wives of other people.
hurry
I'll hurry to go to Valencia because I will be benighted.
Hurry and fetch water because it will soon rain.
Rush it to its destination. We will cause it to be taken quickly
If we have something to be sewn, we give the payment ahead of time because we will rush its sewing.
safety pin
outsider
f we move to another place, we are just outsiders. Even if they are our fellow Manobos, we are still outsiders because it is not our place.
You are called foreigners here in the Philippines because you are subjects of another country.
If they don't have land they are residing on someone else's land.
Lita told Mery to sleep at their place. Mery stayed a short time with them because she joined  for only one night.
We are just resident aliens here on earth.
If your stay is long, that is the meaning of an resident alien because you have joined in
Mary stayed for a short time because she joined for only one night.
afflicted
If a child gets sick who is always bathing , the older people say that he afflicted by an evil spirit because he affected by a long-haired spirit .
If there are children who become ill who are often bathing in the river, the father says, “See. You have become ill from a spirit source.”
If a child gets sick who is always bathing , the older people say that he afflicted by an evil spirit because he was affected by a long-haired spirit
vine
As for the agsam vine, it is used to make leg bands.
High-pitched
endurance
Whoever has stamina to come along, he/she will be chosen.
I cannot bear this illness of mine because it has [lasted] a long time.
put up
The teacher puts up with the child who is always asking questions.
manage
If you can manage my body which has sores, remove them so that it will become well.
Joaquin cannot manage to resolve this problem because it is very difficult.
Patient.
God is patient.
unripe
The papaya is unevenly ripe and unripe; it isn't quite ripe yet.
When someone is pregnant, the baby is positioned when it is not in the right position . And when a person gives birth, [the agud] is the means of helping, by having the hands of the midwife accompany  during the birthing process.
Taganay is the one to manipulate .
The abdomen is that which is manipulated.
When the mother feels pain, she will have someone manipulate the baby's position.
Hollow.
The center of the eggshell is hollow because the yolk is not there.
If the contents are removed, it will become hollow.
The inside of a dug-out canoe is hollowed out as it is made.
The inside of this building is also called spacious.
Uncle made a mortar which was small but the mouth was spacious and deep.
Any kind of hole, if it can hold a lot, it is capacious.
If there are those who are bathing and are always floating downstream, that is drifting together with the current.
The pattern formed during the initial stage of weaving a basket.
The forming of the pattern, that is the agum.
One begins to make a basket. Whatever kind of woven basket, that is the initial stage of weaving a basket.
Buntit is teaching someone how to weave a basket and she is watching the one she is teaching.
layer
The child draws the rambatans to himself; he doesn't want someone else to take them.
Take the rambatans.
revenge
If there is someone who agrees to commit himself to kill someone else, that is the one who will be brave enough to take revenge against an enemy.
If I have a problem, I am not afraid to ask for help.
bark
The dog is barking.
If  goes pighunting and comes across a pig, the dog will bark at the pig.
ache
As for my daughter Jeany who fell from a santol tree, she involuntarily cried out because the throbbing pain hurt excessively.
When the intensity of the throbbing is excessive, we involuntarily cry out from the pain.
Wall
fence
nut
cheated
What is this person who cheats? Just a thief by whom we are being deliberately cheated.
choose
I'm going to choose a house to live in.
Armed warriors
That which is called a wall is that which has a roof like a house upon which the roof is resting on it.
A bus has a side, a multicab and a “jeep”
Even if it is high or if it is short, thick or thin and surrounds a house or the yard, it is called an alad fense.
What is this person who cheats? Just a thief by whom we are being deliberately cheated.
I'm going to pick a house that is wider if it has no people living in it.
There are many houses but just one which will be received.
Even though you should happen to choose, yet if  requested is excessive, you will be unable to get it.
The armed band(s) in the past were bad because they killed who had no fault. But the bands of armed warrior(s) today have become groups of good warriors because they now help the soldiers.
They cause to be taken by surprise when they have banded together in mass to attack so that they all can, without exception, kill.
They band together to attack a certain house.As for that raiding, there are very many who will come against those enemies of theirs.
wire
ritual
This ritual to remove a charm, it is sacrificing to the spirits
There is something which they burn as a means of treatment to remove that love charm.
When his wife (has been released from the charm by means of a ritual, the woman's attitude toward that man will become bad because her love had been forced when she was married .
Have someone treat you because this ailment is witchcraft.
The treatment for a field does not come from a prayer/sacrifice.
That which we use to treat are plants, banga palm, fan palm, plants of the field, vines which are the treatments of plants.
incomplete
The ripening process is still incomplete.
lacking
He caused to be short changed taking my domesticated animals and then not returning them to me
We who were the ones who sowed are the ones who were cheated
Just bring the fragrant soap.
If there is a jeep which is broken down which need sto be taken to the shop to be repaired, it is also pulled by another jeep.
If there are those in a some village who are under someone's authority, it seems that they are all his subjects.
The only way the word is used is if we have a companion whom we invite to go bathing with us and I say, "Just bring the fragrant soap".
fungus
venom
The fruit of the red pepper is hot when it is ripe.
The cat leans back and over when it summer-salts when it plays with other cats.
When we are holding a child in our arms and he lets his back bend back, the child is leaning back and over.
I cause my back to bend backwards when I lean back and over against something because my back hurts.
Our stomach wriggles when we are hungry.
When they are wriggling, your intestines are always moving about because they doesn’t have anything inside.
When the body(s) of the grub(s) are moving, they also wriggle.
We split open the pula palm tree which we have notched and then we see many white grubs which are squirming.
If there is someone who smokes,  if the end becomes burnt, its ashes will drop off.
As for ash, it comes from a fire if there is something that is burned.
The ashes will become dust if they blow/are carried by the wind.
We split open the pula palm tree which we have notched and then we see many white grubs which are wiggling about.
If we desire a girl when this is the first time we have seen her, that is the attraction of the eye(s) because if we don’t see that girl [any more], we will just forget about her.
That [kind] of attraction isn’t bad because when we see a girl and we like her (lit. have breath toward her), yet later on we will be shy to say that we like her. Our attraction isn’t a means of attraction to for doing (lit. because we will do) something wrong.
When we were drawn to God, our love (lit. breath) for God was increased. He alone was the one who drew us [to Himself].
His affection for someone has become focused (lit. arranged). As for that affection, there is just one girl whom he loves. That is the source of his getting married [to her].
We are attracted by the pretty design.
They have made a commitment [to each other] because their feelings (lit. breath) were the same. They have come to an agreement with each other. They desire each other. The attraction of the two [of them] is mutual.
The person who desires many women, that is a lustful person.
Whether it is a person who has a spouse or an unmarried lady, he lusts after all [of them].
Ever since I was a child, I have always lived in Mansalinao.
When there is a shallow mini-lake of water which doesn’t dry up, that is a swamp because it has never ever (lit. not yet ever) been cut.
Walk around the mat.
Mery has to detour when she goes to school because there is no shortcut nearby (lit. no shortcut path here close).
To lift and move by leverage, that is the beginning of turning [the log]. It is lifted and moved by leverage so it will roll.
Regarding a house which needs to be raised, it is jacked up slowly because it is necessary to block the space [made from the lift].
The [piece of] sharpened wood, that is the lever which is put underneath [the log which one intends to move].
There are many kinds of variegated alik-ik plants in our place they are not used to make steamed bread from corn. The only kind that is used is the green alik-ik plant.
In the afternoon (lit. when it is afternoon already), the leaves of the baluy or lumlon [plant] are smoothed out with a corn cob so they can be tightly rolled up.
One person smooths and flattens out [the leaves]. Another person rolls them up.
Brother-in-law was tossing and turning and twisting because his pain which he started experiencing yesterday was excessive.
Uncle is continually tossing and turning. He is always turning over (lit. turning his body over) because his pain is excessive.
ashes
white grubs
attraction
eversince
to go around something
A wave or breaker
Try to resussicate or revive someone such as a person who has fainted or is dying.
If a person has fainted as a result of an illness, we will try to resuscitate him.
miss someone
f we are unable to see our companions for a long time, we become homesick for our home place.
There was someone here who resembled the younger sister of Elena and I saw her pass by the road. It triggered loneliness in me because her walk and her face resembled Elena's younger sister.
Regarding if we have a friend with whom we had a good relationship (lit. our accompanying was good) but then if someone sings his song about God but he is no longer here on the earth, loneliness/grief will be triggered in you when you hear that song [which he sang] when he was still alive.
Memories of someone will be brought back and we will feel very sad .
That which triggered grief in the mother of the child who had died was when she saw the ID of her child.
tornado
When I was on the beach, I was caught by the wind of a strong whirlwind. Dried out plants on the beach were pulled up by the roots and whirled around as the were carried upwards.
rouse from sleep without becoming fully alert.
If there is a child or adult who just gets up without awakening, that is [the meaning] of alimukawan to arouse from sleep without fully waking up.2To come to, from an unconscious state.
I was unconscious  for a half hour before I came to.
hide
Our house was sheltered by the library.
sleep tight
loud sound
shoulder blade
dizzy
If we have vertigo dizziness, the house goes around when we look.
male monkey
The grown up aliwas, it is a male monkey.
The male monkey, that is the leader of a group of monkeys.
The not quite fully grown male monkey, that is one which is still young yet.
industrious
My child is good who has a good character and is industrious.
The only thing he/she pays close attention tor is watching his/her companions; but then [that person] doesn't pay attention to his/her own attitudes.
A banana which is cooked which is called allaba. Granaba is the Visayan name.
There are seven day(s) in a week.
If it is daytime, the sun is high.
If someone asks, “What day is tomorrow?” The reason he is asking is because he does not know whether the next day might be Monday or Wednesday.
grunt
snort
When we hear a pig, it grunts. It goes “Mmm” and then it runs because it is afraid of people.
Even the ghosts, they moan because they are trying to scare us.
fin by the fish's ear
The fin by the fish's ear is what determines the movement of the body of that fish.
moan
From the time that my child fell, she was moaning.  She said, “My whole body hurts.”
shoo
Sonny, chase away the chickens which are eating the rice which is being dried in the sun.
I'll shoo the chickens with “saa”.
Pig can also be shooed away.
distracted
gills
The gills of a fish (lit. water viand), that is what gives breath to the fish.
mud fish
friend
If someone desires to get married, he will pursue it. He will continuously discuss it with the father of the girl until he agrees.
The only thing they will be discussing is how much they will pay immediately upon request as a brideprice for that girl.
If there is a person who [wants to] borrow get something on credit but is ashamed to speak up, then he will tell another person. That person will say, “He has something to discuss with you.”
The leaders are having a group discussion about whether there will be [eventual] reciprocal exhanges for a brideprice.
The person who speaks on behalf of the man is the spokesman for the discussion.
reflection
When we look in a mirror, we see our reflection.
If we look carefully into water which is clear, we have a reflection there below us.
When Jim took our picture and when it was finished, he gave us our picture.
We watch [someone] closely because we don't know what his purpose is.
married couple
As for that married couple, that is the one which has newly been married but does not yet have an offspring.
If there would be someone who would ask who your companion is, they would say, “We are just a married couple. We don't have any children yet.”
There is someone who asks how many families live in that baranggay. The reply is, “There are many families who live here.”
carried away
If we cross a river, if we are not able to discover the shallow places because the water is bubbly, we will be carried away by the current to where it is deep. We will have to swim.
If we go downstream by raft then we beach our raft where the water is calm and we don't beach it where at rapids because our raft will be swept away by the current. Our raft will be carried by the current if we beach our craft at the rapids.
glow
That bulanbulan plant, its glow is very bright.
The brightness of a glow is faint.
Likewise, the bulanbulan “artificial moon” plant glows when it is dark. It’s flowers are bright.
even though
A lizard about 5 or 6 inches long which has a green back, light colored belly and brown tail.
e often inadvertently scare away green lizards on a trail. On occasion [they] come into a house to prey on large or small cockroaches.
The cat pounced on a green lizard upon which it was preying as it likewise was preying on a cochroach.
enough
[I've] had it with this child who is always crying who has a hollowed-out mouth!
My goodness that you have been traveling in the sun when it is excessively hot.
How can you be so calm!
Goodness gracious this child who is always crying whose mouth is a cavern.
Goodness gracious that you travelled in the sunshine when it is exceedingly hot!
Bless your heart for feeling lonely for me.
great relationship
When we are in a good relationship with our companions, if there is a small problem, it will be quickly resolved.
If we love our companions and they also care about us, that is what it means to have a good relationship.
The people have a good relationship because they share with each other whenever they have something to eat
jump
When we play ball, we leap up as we throw the ball.
We jump up and down when we make two or three repetitive jumps.
rodent
The rodent that lives here in the house do not make a mound living quarters because they make a nest in the house.
hen we were still children, we played with each other long ago and we said, “Let's make make-believe rats, and so we will strike the upper arms of our companions.”
hen we strike and then a welt forms on the skin, and that has become the rat which climbed up his arm. That is the rat game.
daughter-in-law
If my son marries, his wife is my daughter-in-law.
lean
When you lean on something for floatation you line up your body with the bamboo [pole]. You use your hands to paddle
Lean on something with one's chest.
fishing creel
The fishing basket is that in which the catch of fish, etc, is placed.
jump
As for a vertical jump, we [jump] upwards.
We jump up and down when we ump repeatedly two or three times.
how respect by lifting an elder's hand to one's forhead
father
The [word] amonggoy, that is also used to call/address a father. It is a name used to praise [one’s father].
father
A step-father (or adoptive father] is not the true [i.e. biological] father.
If [someone] marries the [widowed] mother, that man is the stepfather of her children.
Ugalinga is their adoptive mother and her husband is their adoptive father.
father
young roach
up
The lightbulb is above us.
The radio is on top of the table.
These books are stacked on top of each other.
They completely cut down all of the bamboo for weaving which I had planted without letting it be known by a request. That conduct of theirs usurped the rights of their companion.
pray
tame
hold
woodpeeker
vine
comfort
Even if it is not our relative (lit. companion) if we empathize with the one weeping, we will offer comfort by saying that it is natural that we die.
If someone [loses a loved one] by death, we comfort them by our bearing of the hurt of his/her emotional pain
son-in-law
The wife of my daughter (lit. female offspring) is the one who has become my son-in-law.
mix
There was no coconut to be added.
small fish
tooth marks
abandon
We are [deliberately] abandoning [our offspring].
Uncle
nickname
withhold food
If there is a child who was born outside the village who is [deliberately] left behind by the mother, it has been abandoned by her.
As for the child who has been neglected, he/she is lacking food, clothing, bathing and has no house to live in.
skeleton
As for a skeleton, it is all the bones [of the body] which are not disconnected (lit. separated) from the head, neck, upper arm(s), body which has ribs, thighs and feet [lit. foot] and toes/fingers.
own
confess
prop
later
We were still foolish. As for us, we did not yet have knowledge. We had not yet discovered the good path.
When I fetch the person, I will take the raft across to him.
He went after the saw and returned it to me.
If we eat something that still has a bone, we bite into chew the flesh off until it is stripped of meat.
We bite into and chew off corn, mangos, pangi fruit, papaya and pineapple.
First, you call [the sleeping person]. If he doesn't sense it we take hold of him so that he will be disturbed from sleep.
If we are doing something but if there is something worrying us, the thing we would have done in the beginning is supplanted  And then we are distracted to something else so that we didn't accomplish what we started out to do.
Those who are harvesting are being rushed so that [the harvesting] will soon be finished.
We are being pressured by our leader to hurry so that our work will be finished soon.
As for the teacher, he/she teaches the students.
My grade one teacher was also the one who taught Judith.
The children are being taught so that they will have skills.
I had not expected that I would be able to teach the father and the daughter (lit. offspring).
That person who diligently trains will become skilled.
When he has become skilled, he will likewise use [that skill] to teach another person.
I remember that which my father taught me about the work of sawing wood to make a house.
The children are learning to write.
Be strong to pull [on the saw] so that you will learn so that you will know how to saw.
When you have become trained, you have strength and it is easy for you because you have become accustomed [to the work].
We are not accustomed to those kinds of fish [lit. viand]. We are accustomed to having no [means of catching] fish.
The male-teacher and female teacher(s), they are the teachers of the students.
We help a weak person by holding he hand so that he will gain the ability to walk so that he will be able to become ambulatory.
If the baby (lit. child) in the abdomen has been properly positioned ahead of time, the mother will have it easier when she gives birth.
Just yesterday my horse gave birth.
A pig makes a bed for a place where she will give birth.
Carp fish don’t give birth to multiple offspring until the moon comes out.
As for the po-it fish [lit. creatures of the water which are po-it], its soup is good for the nursing mother because her breasts will produce milk.
We search for the offspring.
When we hunt for frogs, when we see the eggs of the frog, we will just find the mother [frog] because she will be there closely watching over her eggs.
When we give a warning signal, we pay attention to whether there are people -- that is when those who are suspected to be raiders no step on sticks [as they prowl]. We say, “rrrrrr”.
The lasangan fungus which grows where it is damp which is like the kolop fungus, it also shines because it has phosphorescence.
A clock also has phosphorescence.
Turn up the volume (lit. operation of) the radio.
It is as though [something] triggers our thinking.
When we have guests, when the food is served, we get it started [by saying], “Friend, let’s eat now.” We are inviting [him] to come and eat (lit. that we-dual will eat).
If someone has become widowed and for three days has not been able to go out [of the house] (lit. walk), we get a piece of cloth/clothing by which we signify that it is OK now for you to run errands as this clothing is what I use to release you because I have decided to release [you].
We release [her] with [an item of] clothing to resume normal activity.
Let's gather closely together. We will listen to what the leader will say.
We sit in a circle to eat together. There is just one receptacle where food is served.
The reason we say we sit in a circle to eat together is because we are facing each other.
When we give a warning signal, we pay attention to whether there are people -- that is when those who are suspected to be raiders step on sticks as they prowl. We say, "rrrrr".
Water which does not flow has been dammed up.
If the ground is on a downward incline, the water will inadvertently flow.
The water carried away the corn which had not yet been divided into shares.
When the Liboganon River flooded, the corn which was newly harvested was carried downriver by the current.
We purposely float with the current as we lean on pieces of bamboo.
If it sinks to the bottom, it goes to the bottom of the water/river.
First, you call [the sleeping person]. If he doesn't sense it we take hold of him so that he will be disturbed from sleep.
If we are doing something but if there is something worrying us, the thing we would have done in the beginning is supplanted. And then we are distracted to something else so that we didn't accomplish what we started out to do.
Since we keep going back and forth to our work, then I am becoming weary.
Ever since I was a [smaller] child, I haven't had a mother to attend to me and I had only one item of clothing.
From the time that John was born, God was in his heart because He [God] was the one who determined that John should be born.
After having anticipated for how many months as they were waiting to harvest, then they were not able to harvest [after all].
I've become tired of your conduct of habitual drinking.
We purposely disturb our companion because we will eat now; we awaken him/her.
If one of our companions has a debt which [he/she] doesn't pay, we jog his/her memory by asking.
The pig which I am giving to you is being used to open the door to inquiry to jog your memory if you have forgotten that which is mine that is, an unpaid debt for help with a bride price?
His emotions (lit breath) were disturbed by those who were just making [false] accusations. We were taken by surprise because we had not been asked [about it].
Andì will give something to us without charge.
We give without charge to those who have nothing to eat.
We give something to our companions who have nothing to eat.
The male [rodent] was lacking [food] to eat because the female was greedy.
fan palm
cook thoroughly
rattan
beginning
Termite
heron
taro
disturb
float
in-law
bright yellow bird
Parent-in-law
frustrated
cheer
tree
give
lack
Limestone
Cheek
Gallbladder
If the limestone is pounded into a powder it can by used as lime.
One's gallbladder is good if there is nothing to upset him.
If there are many birds of the same variety which are attracted/gathered, we call that pet [bird] a lure which is able to attract its companion.
If the limestone rock is pounded into a powder it can be used as lime.
This person is just being argumentative whose argument is not correct.
The excessively argumentative person won't quit talking.
This child who talks back to that which his mother tells him to do is too much.
But the mother said, "That's enough from this child who won't get rid of the subject of his arguing."
We will ask what the source of the argument was.
Mother is frustrated because she has a lot of rice to weed. She says her rice will be wasted if she cannot finish weeding.
We’re irritated because we have to walk.
The person who gets provoked, even if what we say is small, will quickly become angry.
We are provoked that the horse was sold and so it won't be paid for.
Igì is venting her frustration because there is no one to watch her children, so she cannot go dig camotes.
When we cut down bamboo, we sharpen it because we will make it into a bamboo spear.
The day which will arrive, that is tomorrow.
First, I will take your horse and then the next day you will go to my house and ask if I have anything to use as payment.
As for a dog, when it chews on a bone, it makes a crunching sound.
Lime
Argue
Argumentative person
Monkey trap
Grandpa
forest plant
refuge
Grandparent
Great grandparent
Great great grandparent
Curved knife
frustrated
Moth ball
Airplane
Skin rash
boy
Spouse
Salt
Strand
Tomorrow
Dog
hide
provoked
At the time when the rice was harvested, they shared with those who, in contrast to others, didn't have anything to harvest, and so all the people were able to eat.
If we are taking someone into custody, we say, “Don’t resist because you are caught and already surrounded.”
I am the one upon whom he was venting [his emotions] because he wanted me to react against the ones who were attacking me.
Quit talking because I will get fed up with you and I will happen to react in an undesirable manner against you.
The day which will arrive, that is tomorrow.
First, I will take your horse and then the next day you will go to my house and ask if I have anything to use as payment.
When we feel OK about something, it means that we are free of apprehension. We trust in him.
As for that being frustrated, she was definitely not at peace.
The meaning is uncluttered, straight and our understanding [of the words] is clear.
As for the sun, it produces (lit. gives) rays of light.
If ten women are weeding their rice, they work together as a group as they weed.
If it is a house which needs to be made higher, it will be jacked up slowly because it is necessary to insert props under the house posts.
I slept by myself.
When there is someone to take care of a child, the mother can get away by herself.
Take my son aside to tell him where others won't hear that I will have him come home for a while when they have finished playing.
I’ll get you off by yourself.
As for Cain, he got his younger sibling off by himself to kill.
When we are in a good relationship with our companions, if there is a small problem, it will be quickly resolved.
Get out!
Spirit dog said to bark at night
Sugar
Skin inflammation
Travel by pair
block
Ashes
Ear wax
Sister
constipated
shield
Egg
Roof
Liver
resist
Sic chickens on each other
tell riddles at a wake
Garlic
Light
Need
withdraw alone
Remove
treasure
carefully
Carefully
careful
Do carefully.
crayfish
toy
pet
Domesticate
Hoard
Lure
Tept
Motivate
Pacify
Taboo
Poor
parallel
Fit
Not fitting
Inappropriate
When we are buying something, we look at it carefully.
When we plant something such as seedlings, then we will do the planting carefully.
And be careful su possibly you will fall asleep and suddenly your younger sibling will fall.
A person had just nine pesos with which he bought a dove which he would domesticate.
The child who is slow to finish what he was given to eat, he is hoarding his food.
The men would be enticed. In my opinion, that isn't appropriate.
When we motivate a child to sweep, we hand him a broom so that he will learn.
Candy was used to pacify the child who was crying.
A destitute person who is always being scolded, when the criticism affects him deeply emotionally so that he can no longer endure it, he will have to react.
That word "teach" doesn't fit the context because the concept was a result of rebellion.
It doesn't work to sift something wet because it would stick.
The meaning was jumbled when there were words which don't fit.
evil spirit
Half.
Chest
Carry
junction
Obey.
build house
find someone
large forest
Shallow.
Pig.
unconscious.
Unfurl,
untie
small amount
Arm wrestling
Red hot coals.
Beaded belt.
Corncob.
Warrior.
Bulisung is a cliff in which a hole has been formed at the base which has a deep area containing a whirlpool.
Someone took away a half portion of my land. A half portion is a half.
If you are the owner of a sack of corn which you will divide in half, you will give half of it.
If a sack of rice is divided by three, there will be three equal portions.
If the river has risen, it will become divided in two parts because it has passed into a secondary channel.
The one who will claim the head is the one who carried the pig on his back.
If someone comes for a visit from Kapalong, he will have us meet him at the river junction.
The child won't obey.
If one builds a house, he begins to make it.
When you went to visit Lillian, you reached her while she was still at home, you found her at home.
When we cross a river, if we cannot locate a shallow place because the water is foaming, we will be swept into deep water.
If there is a horse which I would hold (lit. reserve), I will give a pig as a downpayment.
Jessica just wanted to claim a large cluster of lansones for herself.
Two people are arm wrestling to see which of them is the strongest.
If I fuel a fire with wood and the fire is hot/strong, it has ignited and has formed hot coals.
A bagakis is a braided belt made from horse hair which has been studded with beads.
The person who is a warrior is someone who has killed many people.
Abaca bark.
red rice
Planting stick.
emphasize
dance
fetish
rattan container
pull up
spear
Rapids of a river.
fish
split open
ring
climbing bamboo
silent
Cut-down.
flap
Skull.
flesh and bone
Soft soil.
tree roots.
Part of certain traps released by the trigger.
A whole clump of bamboo was cracked when a dead tree fell on top of it.
The person who is speaking and does not laugh, he is emphasizing the words of whatever his news is.
The person who danced to the kuglung instrument was turning from side to side as he/she was dancing.
The person who is strong-willed, he resists any kind of advice.
The person who uses a light to fish for frogs spears them with a multiple-pronged spear.
If it is dry season and the sunny days without rain are long, the soil splits open and cracks.
If the creatures become silent, they simultaneously stop making a noise.
If the person's omen is bad, he will not proceed because he is being held back.
When the ubun-ubun dove calls it says, "bagu-bù, huun, huun, huun."
A rooster flaps his wings when he spreads his wings.
The bone(s) of a human head is called the skull.
The edge of the river which is flat in which reeds grow, that is soft soil ground.
When the trigger slips off, the lever which kills or traps the animal is released.
The people who lived long ago, they still wore g-strings because they didn't yet have very much material.
There were many people who wore g-strings at that time long ago.
Scaffolding is the temporary structure on which we stand when we build the body of a house.
As for a charm, we put a charm on a girl when we don't have courage to ask.
As for that love charm, it is worn as an armband on the arm or worn as a necklace.
When a pig has not yet given birth, you give some money, even one half to start with, signifying that it is a deposit to hold the piglet you have reserved.
When we make a deposit on something, we give a piece of material as a deposit to reserve a piglet.
Scaffolding is the temporary structure on which we stand when we build the body of a house.
snail
Loincloth.
Scaffolding of a house.
Shaman.
contrary
bird
brisket
Armband
frog
ascend
castrate
enfold
wrap up
swelling of jaws
Armband
partial payment
Python.
Piglet.
Chin
cockroach
plant
recover
hard shell
embrace
Mother's cut camote stems are gathered together which she will use to plant sweet potatoes tomorrow.
We will plant camote stems today because we have burned our fields.
When we plant camote stem cuttings, we get a sharpened stick which we use to dig that in which we will plant stems.
When the sweet potato field has become old, we remove the old sweet potato vines and then we allow the sweet potatoes to grow back as they sprout new sweet potato vines.
When an older person sold his dog which wasn't yet paid for, and when the person who got that dog has paid for it, the dog's value has been returned and so the owner has been repaid because the dog has been paid for.
I will recover my knife when my corn is sold.
I will buy back my dog because I was forced to sell it because there was nothing else I could do.
The hard shell, that is the body of the creatures like crabs, turtles, certain shellfish, water snails, pointed shellfish, land snails, certain edible shellfish, clams, and small clams.
I was embraced.
A bala-an is a small bamboo container in which edible water creatures are put.
When there is a shallow mini-lake of water which doesn't dry up, that is a swamp because it has never been cut.
The rice will be abundant if it is grown in a swampy area.
It's on the shelf.
There is a pattern that is parallel to one's body and there is a pattern that is crosswise to the body.
He contradicted that which was said by someone else.
When we look at the date of a month, we need to reserve a time when there is nothing which will conflict so that the gathering will happen.
My uncle is occupied by the building of his house. That is what he pays attention to first.
There were some who came to meet us when we arrived at another place.
As for a cock, what is used as a treatment is the hair of a weasel which is used to smoke the chicken so that it will fight fiercely.
The child was made to stop his playing.
plant
recover
hard shell
embrace
bamboo container for fish
swamp
water thrush
female pig or piglet
shelf, contradict
crosswise direction
small melon
kind of white rice
ignore
offspring of edible bakbak frog
tuck tail between legs
rattan
kind of mottled rice
to be busy
come over to meet someone
kind of bamboo
cassava
make fierce
tell someone not to do something
facial hair
The balaring is an ear plug necklace which has decorative notches.
To lift with a lever, that is the beginning of turning the log over. It is lifted by leverage so it will roll.
He is always tossing and turning because his pain is excessive.
A single turn is just one curve.
The path of the highway which goes to Sinuda, it is always twisting and turning.
The person who is weaving cloth, uses the weaving bar to press down that which he is weaving.
My nylon cord fell from the table and became tangled because it became dishevelled because it came off of the spool.
If someone is very worried, he comes apart emotionally.
When I played ball, my foot was sprained and so it became difficult for me to walk because it swelled and was a whole week before the swelling went down.
When a table is bumped, the glasses which were on the table will tip over and fall.
The person who fell from a house, fell head over heels to the ground.
We are afraid that the child will rock forward and will fall head over heels.
The cat leans back and tumbles when it plays with another cat.
There are six stitches in my gums. Each one was knotted.
bush
fish
woodpecker
thunder
fish
earplug
sword
trap
sugarcane
bean
evil spirit
finally
however
charge
split a tree
necklace
refuse
nauseated
turn around
overturn
twist and turn
curve
turn
wooder bar
tangled
emotionally distraught
twisted
sprained
tip over
fall head over heels
knot a thread
The baliok tree is red and its body is very hard and is used to make axe handles, spear shafts and extensions to a house because it doesn't get holes from the bokbok insect.
There was some bamboo on which a dead tree fell which was splintered because the whole clump was cracked.
The new rolled up leaf of the taro plant is good as a vegetable.
As for the person who has hemorrhoids, the veins of the rectum become distended and then they hurt when one has to defecate.
When a person defecates, the fecal material passes through the anus.
The spirit which is called mountain resident is the owner which dwells in the mountains, balete trees, cliffs and waterfalls. Those are of the same nature of the busow spirits of the dead.
The gaze of the older monkey was behind him because they were watching their young offspring.
The words of the Manobo and of English are opposite. They have been reversed.
He/she is the parent of my child's spouse.
The father and mother of the man and of the woman, those are the ones who are especially in the relationship between parents of spouses.
For a raft, there are two cross pieces which are tied to the outriggers.
The person who makes a raft, gets a piece of wood with which to make a cross piece which is tied on with that which is used for binding.
The host hurried to meet the guest who arrived at his house and he welcomed and gathered information from him as they talked with one another.
Whoever lives at his/her house, they are one household.
The house is getting old.
The people long ago would cut a piece of bamboo which was about the size of a pole which was used to measure a diagram of a house in order to establish where the rooms, the porch and the doors will be.
When the single length of bamboo is pulled up, if it is full of earth, its sign is good because the rice will be plentiful.
The older person will say, "Get a chicken to waver to remove your bad luck."
The older people go out to a field of matured secondary growth and have a ceremony to determine whether it would be good to cut the growth on that piece of ground for a field.
He has a resemblance to pogul wood because he's lazy.
The horse which is being treated, with something to make him fierce, he becomes like the creatures which are likewise fierce.
Taganay has gotten fat.
When it is still daytime and it has begun to thunder without rain, we hear thunder when it is not yet raining.
We cannot be freed unless we have been redeemed/ransomed. It comes from that which was used as a ransom.
A person who is cheerful is quick to laugh if he/she sees his/her companion(s). It's like he/she has no worries.
If we make a waterhole on the beach, we place sand there so that the debris will be filtered out.
pinkish wood
splinter
split up
new rolled up leaf
rectum
anus
balete tree
spirit
turn around
reversed
cross piece
rattan trap
echo
repay
welcome
repair
house
household
miniature house
diagram
prediction
bad sign
widow
widower
large seed
thunder without rain
ransom
redeem
cheerful
kind of millet
long hair
necklace
waterhole
straight cut
rainbow
There was a woman who gathered her laundry together and wrapped it in a blanket.
An area between two mountains, that is a pass.
The ground from one mountain, creates a valley over to the slope of the other mountain.
On my property, there is a curving stream which always makes the soil collapse. My intention is to make a pathway for the water to channel it so that the water will go directly across.
Some people follow a creek when they travel and go uphill when they go to the mountains.
The flint is a red rock. We make it into a device for starting a fire.
The person who intercepts an enemy watches the path where their leader will pass.
If one is intercepted, you are blocked when you pass by way of the raiders.
If we have a leader who is traveling, there are six bodyguards.
As for grubs, one makes notches in the wood; it is grooved.
He throws a ball.
The child threw something at his companion.
The children are throwing corncobs at each other.
The chicken was thrown to the ground.
The person who is taken by surprise that his eyebrow hurts has a sinus-type headache.
A hoop is made of rattan which is wound in and out into a circle which is tossed to roll and is caught with a thrust of a stick as the children play.
I'll be the one to roll the hoop of coiled rattan.
A woven rattan chicken carrier, that is a chicken carrier in which a chicken is placed when it is carried somewhere.
When the moon comes up, our bodies are hit by the light of the moon, we have a shadow.
whittle rattan.
Pencil sharpener.
wrap something
empty flour sack.
Canoe.
A sleeping mat.
transformed.
Small male rat.
Its wood is useful as flooring.
Beard on cheeks.
valley
dip
channel
intercepted
bodyguard.
notch in wood.
make notches.
throw or toss.
Throw something at someone or something.
For many to throw something at one another.
That which is thrown.
tie up
A hoop.
throw a hoop.
roll as a hoop.
sugarcane.
chicken carrier.
Canoe.
curved knife
Rainbow.
plant
hit
The person who has finished harvesting, he removes the old plants as he weeds.
The person who felt badly because his child newly died, the next day he felt better and his thoughts cleared.
A drunk person staggers as he is walking and keeps toppling from one side to another as he takes steps.
A damolugan lizard is roasted and fed to a child as a remedy for that which is making him/her thin.
We are procrastinating our waking up because we are lazy to get up.
You were slow to make your purchase of the axe because you needed its price to be reduced.
Sometimes the material which is waved is placed over the shoulder when dancing or the two pieces of material or the ends held at the waist.
The person who dances to the drum waves two pieces of material.
A mother will carry her children in both arms when she goes visiting.
The person whose horse was confiscated for a debt, yelled with a loud yell, "Why is it that I am the one from whom you take something for a debt when I have no debt to you?"
As for a person exalting himself, when in a discussion, He loudly brags and says, "My own name is that which is able to lift up our companion who is overwhelmed by a problem."
The person is making tentative plans to make a field this year at the headwaters of the Imbabalud stream because the secondary forest there is mature.
The person who is still tentatively planning, he is still merely thinking about making a field where there is a mature secondary forest.
When you fish with a spear, you watch for the silver-colored fish when it is still far away. When it passes near, you spear it as you jab/thrust at it.
You watch in readiness to spear a fish and when one happens to get close, you spear it as you jab/thrust at it.
As for Father's house, it is struck by the light of the sun. When it rises in the morning, it is very much inadvertently struck by the rays of the sun.
When the sawog fish comes next to us, it comes into our clear view.
When we aim a gun at a bird, and when we have sighted it, we shoot the air gun and then the bird is hit.
If a horse doesn't want to travel, it continually rears up as it tries to shake off the reins as it walks.
That which we use to scrape the wood so that it will be smooth which was made into a scraper which came from balakayu bamboo.
We scrape the sheath of the knife so that it will become smooth.
The woman who was worried about her mate who was slow to arrive and come into the house says, "Your nose is too much which causes people to be very worried."
Feel better.
Deviate.
Deviate.
Stagger.
Scar.
Form a scar.
Procrastinate.
Wave cloth while dancing.
Carry in both arms.
Yell.
Brag loudly.
Make tentative plans.
Fish spear.
Fish with a spear.
Wait in readiness to spear.
Ambush.
Be struck.
Come into view.
Be sighted.
Spur
Grow spurs.
Have long spurs.
Tree with long thorns.
Watch.
Familiar spirit.
Watch over.
Fame.
Famous.
Become famous.
Seek fame.
Someone who is famous.
Act like the opposite sex.
Bird of prey.
Monkey-eating eagle.
Rear up
Scraper.
Scrape or smooth.
Beat or whip.
Cheap.
Cheaper.
Nose.
Cheap.
Cheaper.
Nose.
Dried out plants on the beach were uprooted and whirled around as they were carried upwards.
If a tooth is chipped off, it will be made easier to pull out the tooth.
As for the Liboganon river, the cane there in the flat area is thick and its body is hard.
If there are those who are having a sacrificial ceremony, they constantly play a rhythm on a drum. The drum which is played is beaten with sticks or one's hands.
There is a person who teaches his dog how to hunt for wild pigs.
When a pig is caught in a pig trap, the trigger is released and the wild pig is pierced.
All palm trees, when they finish bearing fruit, they die and basiow is what it is called because the inner core is rotting; it is becoming hollow.
The person who is persistent and strong to work, that is an industrious person.
The Imbabasuk spirit is the one who gives a big harvest. That is the one who does magic.
I didn't catch any fish because there were those who were using a light for fishing who were illuminating the water.
The phosphorescent leaf, that is what we use to light up our pathway.
The child who has not yet been circumcised and who has something white on his penis, the foreskin will easily come off.
A person sent his nephew to fetch a carabao from Aninipot and then his nephew really side-stepped the order because he went instead to Maguiman.
We would like to request please that you take this for us-excl please.
There is a house whose pattern is pretty.
The design of your blouse is pretty.
The losok snake has a mottled pattern to its body.
Just go around because there is a log in the way.
A red wild chicken which has a loud crow is called batug.
Uproot.
Pull out.
Read.
Hard.
Soil.
Muddy.
Play a rhythm.
Teach.
Release
Be industrious.
Illuminate.
Show.
Converse.
Log.
Kill.
Converse.
Try to converse.
Custom.
Tell.
Step aside.
Side-step.
Make a polite request.
Design.
Patterned.
Child.
Young.
Follower.
Bachelor.
Younger.
Uprooted stump.
Stone.
Necklace.
Magnet.
Weight.
Rocky place.
Made of stone.
Log.
Stone.
A necklace;
Magnet.
weight
rocky place.
rocks
wild chicker
It's as if one cannot discover the meaning.
We had not yet discovered the good path.
The mixture is buried in the ground for two days before finding it to have become the agkud delicacy.
Whatever medicine is effective against an illness, that is strong medicine.
If your love does not change to another girl, then you have identified the girl with whom you had an agreement to be the one whom you would marry.
As for the present-day people who have come later, there is a custom to have an outhouse for defecating and so that is the only place people will go to to defecate.
If we cross a river, if we cannot locate a shallow area because the water is swift, we will be carried away by the current to a deep area.
That is what we call passed down to an offspring. The authority of David, it is passed down to Joseph. And the authority of Joseph, it is then passed down to/found in Jesus.
Jesus miraculously healed many people.
The widow said, "I'm after the house that Jeremy made but I don't yet have anything to use for payment."
Those whom we call as slaves are the ones who are always made to work. They have a hard time.
It's difficult for us.
The sand by the ocean glistens.
When we finish eating and stack the dishes, we clear the table of dishes and food.
As for people who swim underwater, they hold their breath as they swim underwater as they search for fish to see whether there are some they can encounter there under the water.
The person who has something that is making him feel badly, he will strengthen himself so that he can endure the difficulty which he has encountered.
Why did you falsely accuse me of doing something when I certainly did not do something wrong.
That woman has rolls of fat around her stomach.
Find.
Be effective.
Identify.
Locate.
Return.
Find out.
Ascend.
miraculously heal.
echo
Pay.
payment.
Difficult.
oppressed,
Suffering.
Least flycatcher
Mottled rice.
white rice.
white rice with dark hull.
Sand from beach.
Wattle of chicken
remove dishses
Way,
Path.
Come across, encounter.
experience
Never mind
black rice.
Old ladder.
To be in severe pain.
Roundworms.
Person with worms; Wormy.
A kind of hardwood tree with small leaves which are used to bathe a baby.
Scornful term of address for a woman.
Clamshell, clam.
Lips.
An instrument used in weaving made of wood and pointed on both ends, used in weaving.
Twist.
Writhe.
An edible, large leafed plant with tuberous roots; taro, a plant similar to gabi.
Kind of dark-leaved plant with white flowers, the leaves and body of which are used as a food.
Kind of pattern of a carved comb made of bamboo.
It becomes dark as the moon sets.
The moon goes over the horizon; it disappears.
A person makes wood shavings so that he can ignite them with a match.
We use a sawing motion to create friction so that we can make fire.
The mother pinched and pulled the cheek of her child because he was always playing and wouldn't come home.
There was a person who placed a noose beside the nest of a dove. Then he shooed the dove and then the neck of the dove was caught in the noose because the noose tightened around its neck.
Do you want to drink coffee?
First, they pound the tabacco with a small piece of wood. When it has become smooth, they transfer it to a small mortar and then they pound it there with a pestle.
Don't grab and pull on my dress because it will tear.
Oops! His shirt has been torn.
shrimp
snap in two
faint
cut wood
start a fire
stretch a basket
discharge
eel
soot
lamp soot
heron
split lip
born with a split lip
pinch someone
lose permanent teeth
be missing teeth
fold leaves
language shorthand
kind of white rice having large grains
pound
pulverize
eggbeater
grab
be torn
heart
kuglug
beaded bracelet
bracelet
forearm
group of people
The people placed their things in a bedbasket with a lid. It won't deteriorate if it is covered with the sticky sap of a tabun fruit.
The woman with high status is what a woman is called who is a leader with respect to her conduct because she knows how to teach and to settle cases.
The woman who is outgoing is good because she isn't shy; she quickly shows hospitality when there are guests.
The person who has a kuglung instrument gets a string made from the philidendra.
What I am carrying suspended is lightweight.
The word mako-on means that what is eaten is plentiful here at Nasuli and there is no famine.
The floor sagged when something heavy was placed on it but it didn't break.
The person straightened his arrows because they were bent.
The fin by the fish's ear is what determines the movement of the body of that fish.
No one will scold you because I have made the decision.
The child is making a depression in the dust and ashes of the fireplace.
As for a dog, it likes to make a bed on the fireplace while the fireplace is still warm.
If the vine wound around the tree, it wrapped around it.
A person who was wounded took a piece of material and wrapped it around his wound.
Joaquin cannot manage to resolve this problem because it is very difficult.
But if there is a means of defense, we who are living there won't feel insecure because our living situation will be secure.
The bird's weight is two kilos.
The reason it becomes difficult to saw is because there is a lot of sawdust.
The person who was the leader of a certain place received a written warning which said, "Tell your subjects not to go to the outposts because the soldiers will be coming upriver to see the villages."
The person who has a lot of animals is called wealthy.
Maambago is important because it is admired because the people are good.
The leader of a village has political power because he is able to give orders.
There is power in the lightning because it is able to set trees on fire.
God is the one who has the greatest power.
basket,
fish eggs
kind of rice
woman of high status
root
dangle
carry
famine
starve
hang up
hang by
pit
star
pattern
forest spider
intestines
become bent
mouth
will
determine
decide,
make a decision
condemn
turtle
spring of water
water dipper
be numb
wind
bandage
metal bracelet
molar tooth
similar to a molar in shape
seed
heavy
expensiv
be difficult
secure
weight
heaviest
difficult
a warning
wealthy
powerful
important
political power
power
supernatural power
If a spring is new, it cannot be stretched because it is very strong. We cannot manage to stretch it.
I'll have something given to me.
He didn't allow him to take half of those piglets.
The cone-shaped fish trap is made from bamboo which is one way to catch water life.
We prepare ourselves ahead of time. It's as if we have had an intuitive warning.
When the sweet potatoes start to break through the soil, the soil cracks but the fruits cannot be seen yet.
When the sweet potatoes bulge and crack the soil, they can really be seen.
As for the sweet potatoes, they are bulging and cracking the soil.
A person who reads a book, opens it up to read.
It is being unfolded.
A person who is catching crabs with his/her hands, lifts the rocks off so that he/she can pick up the crab(s).
As for the rice plant, it naturally spreads out at the base.
The sun is bright (bursts forth).
The person who is first to speak, that is the one who initiates the discussion.
When the trigger of the pig trap is released, a pig which has been caught.
A person who is fishing on a tributary of the river blocks the tributary so that it will dry up.
The angry person, vented his anger; he went right ahead and spoke. He spoke loudly because we are taken by surprise.
It is difficult if we are the recipients of someone's angry outburst.
The person who is lying in ambush, strikes his enemy when he spears him.
The woman removed her laundry when she collected it.
The debris is removed from a mat when a woman shakes it.
When the discussion of the gathered people was finished, they left for home. There were no people left.
As for a person who is making a house, when he set the houseposts in place, he gets something to use as a brace with which to provide support for the housepost.
There were six people who went hunting with a weapon.
Arrow(s), or spear(s), or a spear trap are that which are used for hunting.
He rarely shells corn by hand.
A person whose eye gets something in it cannot open his eye.
If a carabao crosses a large river, it will just be carried by the current.
If the carabao cannot touch bottom, it will be carried away by the current. But if the carabao can touch bottom, it will manage the current as it crosses the river.
It is difficult for a person to cross the swift bubbly current of a river.
dialect variant of boyow
strong
dialect variant of bonok
give
gift
permit
water bird
paddle of canoe
warning
carried lunch
carry lunch
cool off
female
female companion
female animal
few
open up
unfold
lift off,
expand
initiate a conversation
to release
to block
to vent
recipients
strike
pound
remove something
be removed
have gone
bone
choke
lump in throat
to unfold, as a letter
lift off
instrument
hunting with a gun
arm
paw
a coverin
to open
spread out
carried
bubbly current
The person who sows rice seed in his field just sows it evenly so that it will all be the same and there will be none sown thickly.
There is a person who cannot see because his eyes are glazed over due to being covered with a white film.
When crabs are wrapped in a leaf, we tie them up securely by wrapping a vine around them several times.
Wrap around securely when you tie it up.
There are splotches on the body of a child when he/she is two weeks old from the time of birth. They develop from his/her milk. The splotches just go away when he is older.
The person got some rice and added canned fish to it to feed the cat.
Whatever is added to food, it is also that which is added to food.
The person who has a rice field that is about to be harvested, clears an area around the field to keep wild pigs out.
The bongit, okang, kulagu, and pulow owls only call at night. When they hoot, the older people mistakenly think they are evil spirits.
The first time that a person broke up the soil as he plowed his land, he had great difficulty doing the work.
The roasted corn is fed to the mother who has newly given birth so that the blood clots will be broken loose and be discharged which were inside her body.
The niece who had been recently married was broken loose from her marriage relationship by her aunt because she had simply advised her to desert her husband.
As for a woman who is newly pregnant, if she cannot eat what she is craving for, the pregnancy will be terminated because the baby will come out.
If the accusation is true that a person has done wrong, they will pay up front for the settlement of one who has sinned.
As for the person who makes an issue about something, someone else will have to speak in order to make a settlement.
They will use speech that hits the mark. It will establish the truth of the matter. The person cannot answer back.
As for people long ago, they weren't able to play because they would be quick to demand retribution and then would ask for a large settlement.
If I have made a deposit on a carabao calf but I cannot follow through to pay for it, the money I paid to hold it will not be returned because it will be forfeited.
The base of a mountain, that is at the bottom of the incline which is the ending of the steep part.
When there is something in which brass is placed there on the bottom and sides of a shield, that is that which secures it so that it won't come apart when men fight each other with spears.
I will beg some of your palm tree fiber because I will make it into kindling so that we will have a fire.
If the borasboras tree is cut down, the stump will recover and it will still sprout.
Buy.
Distribute evenly.
Dance
Tie up securely.
Wiggle.
Be surprised.
Tired.
Breathless.
Bend.
Clear area
Angry.
Opposed.
Break up.
Break loose.
Miscarry.
Bent.
Curved.
Crooked.
Deaf.
Seed.
Accusation.
Accuse.
Convict.
Demand retribution.
Forfeit.
Goiter.
Palm wood.
Mountain base.
Shield base/edge.
Hard bamboo.
Coconut husk.
If a woman says, “I will have been made pregnant,” it means, “Someone has sinned against me.”
A man says, “My wife has become pregnant on me; maybe she will give birth when I am absent.”
When someone pounds rice, many rice [grains] fly out of the mortar as a result of our striking [them with the pestle].
When the intensity of the throbbing is excessive, we involuntarily cry out from the throbbing pain.
As for the woman, she spread the flooring apart and that was where the spear passed through which was used to spear her enemy.
The child's legs were spread apart as he/she was sitting.
When a child walks as he/she is playing and lifts his other foot above his/her waist, [his/her] legs and thighs are also spread apart.
Mery has to detour when she goes to school because there is no shortcut path nearby.
The only thing they will be discussing is how much they will pay immediately upon request as a brideprice for that girl.
The pay up front means, whatever he requests, we will go ahead and give it.
A person gets a piece of bamboo the size of that used for poling and that is what he splits in half.
The rice which was placed in the winnowing tray will just get spilled if there are children who will mess around with it.
There was a student who was out of control who was slashing at his companions.
One says, “Usi, let's wrestle.” The other says, “Yes, let’s wrestle,” and so then they wrestle with each other.
Two men wrestle with each other to discover who is the strongest.
In our place, it is necessary that we be well-behaved so that we won't be discredited.
Become pregnant.
Fly out.
Throbbing.
Spread apart.
Shortcut.
Take a shortcut.
Pay upfront.
Pay immediately.
Half.
Cut in half.
Vagina.
Young coconut.
Ridge.
Be called by a dove .
Explode.
Bang.
Bend.
Spill.
Brother-in-law.
Wild.
Crazy.
Become dirty.
Play wrestle.
Knee.
Unripe.
Maybe.
Lullaby.
Sing a lullaby.
Swing.
Fish trap.
Fontanel (baby's soft spot).
The talabubung, they are companions of the evil spirits. Those are the ones who are owners who live in the mountains, baliti trees, cliffs and waterfalls.
People who have talabubung familiar spirits anticipate that they will be transported to heaven.
We will begin to cut the field at the bottom of the field.
When bees swarm, they stay just one week [in their hive] and then they leave the hive to transfer.
An egg which stinks and has not yet developed and will not hatch, that has become underdeveloped and spoiled.
We are alive.
It's like Ann Joy whose illness was difficult. We lost hope because she could no longer live.
As for the person who makes fire by rubbing something back and forth, [the fire] is alive if it begins to smoke.
The grandmother was the one to take care of and provide sustenance for her daughter's child who was orphaned.
What could I have done in that [I am] just a woman and so it's hard for me to give life/sustenance to our children who are still small.
Abandon your husband because he is unable to provide for you because he will not work.
Ridgepole.
Sky.
Mountain.
Thigh.
Tobacco seed.
Sprinkle.
Prolific.
Propagate.
Begin.
Abandon hive.
Decompose.
Burst.
Obstruct.
Hinder.
Interrupt.
Initiate.
Pack.
Wrap.
Spread out.
Plant.
Fall sitting.
Ear discharge.
Pelvis.
Only child.
Alone.
Solitary.
Withdraw.
Eat alone.
Set aside.
Spoiled egg.
Dried betelnut.
Dry up.
Live.
Resuscitate.
Come alive.
Give life.
Cure.
Blossom.
Flower.
Bushy.
Fluff.
As for the teacher who was returning home to Maniki, she was taken part way by the children as far as Patil.
A person with his dog pursued a pig which was wounded by a sharpened stake.
After a marriage, the man will take the woman he has married to their home for a period of time as per agreement with her parents.
When she had not yet been freed from the charm, she loved her husband and she was very happy.
When something gleams like gold, its glint is beautiful. Its gleam is soft.
Bit.
Weevil.
Insect dust.
Infested.
Shake out.
Beat.
Forehead.
Fuzzy.
Crayfish.
Knot.
Ankle.
Tailless.
Uncircumcised.
Wrap oneself.
Form cocoon.
Envelop.
Escort.
Pursue.
Piglet.
Stir.
Evenly stirred.
Wash out.
Engulf.
Drain.
Dig canal.
Strong-willed.
Moon.
Month.
Shine.
Stay.
Monthly worker.
Work monthly.
Travel by moonlight.
Night-flower.
Bride transfer.
Boil core.
Take food.
Be freed.
Gleam.
Reddish-yellow.
Gold.
Gold.
Hair.
A person whose eye gets something in it cannot open his eye.
As for a person who has a cough, the one who has a whooping cough is always coughing because his throat is itching.
Some time ago when I was still a child, I had an ailment called alap-ap but I cured it with the plant kapigsula which grows on the beach.
His body was refreshed. He was satisfying his body in the water.
The leaves called kunakun are fed into the fire as a treatment for bugs.
The people are being drawn together to attend the Kaamulan celebration because there are things to see.
When a boil bursts, the pus will be mixed with blood.
The woman pressed the head of the mudfish to break its neck and so it died.
There was a person who went bathing and dove headfirst and broke his neck because he hit his head [against something].
Hairy.
Hair swirl.
Wild banana.
Help.
Stab repeatedly.
Biting ant.
Striped fur.
Millet.
Lime paste.
Spread.
Bird.
Eye irritant.
Piglet.
Cough.
Foam.
Bamboo.
Curl up.
Medicine.
Cure.
Satisfy.
Be cured.
Be full.
Use as medicine.
Flow forcefully.
Gather.
Fierce.
Brave.
Boil.
Form boil.
Bomb.
Horn.
Reed.
Break neck.
Filth.
A rattan seive is the plug of a lime container. It is made of rattan and is a seive for the lime.
If there is a side-stream which has been blocked, if a person breaks up the blockage, it has been cleared.
Wherever the tether of the dog ends, that is where he will be limited.
There was a person who lost two hundred pesos of his money. He came to an end of looking for it but didn't find it.
If we have a companion who has conduct which cannot be changed, we give up on teaching him to do good.
The doctor ran out of options for Ann Joy. Even if there was something they could do to save her, she would still die.
A person who is making a field, has an ending of the edge of his field and that is how far he will allow his field to extend.
The rope is that which is setting a limit so that it will not go any farther.
As for the lawa-an tree, when there is a lump of sap on the lawa-an tree, when it is hardened, that is the resin which can be made into a light.
When a woman newly gives birth and is always bleeding, we knead the lower abdomen so that the uterus will contract and the bleeding will stop.
When a piglet nurses, it is always pumping the breasts of the mother so that they will fill with milk.
If a pregnant pig is rammed into by another pig, it will miscarry and that with which it was pregnant will be discharged.
That propagate, it will become many and spread there in our place.
One person says, "From where did you transport that seed?" I say, "From Maguimon. They asked for that seed which they will also propagate."
The rats will propagate; it mated with another rat which was not the same as itself.
We happened to have propagated another kind of rat.
Fill the hole with earth.
When the sun goes down, darkness covers the earth.
That which erases the footprints is the rain.
The person who hides a fault transfers the blame to someone else.
If a person is talking, he cannot continue talking if another person squelches the one speaking. He is the one who overrides his own speech.
Remove blockage.
End.
Give up.
Run out of options.
Sap lump.
Knead.
Pump.
Miscarry.
Propagate.
Mixed breed birth.
Cover.
Fill in.
Erase.
Hide.
Squelch.
Ram.
Bump.
Tree.
Baby teeth.
Disappointed.
Small fishhook.
Bold.
Uninhibited.
Egg yolk.
Tree.
Base.
Sty.
Begin.
Morning star.
Stare.
Large abdomen.
Dark holes.
Big stomach.
Sore thighs.
Throw spear.
Spear.
As for the person who is going to buy rice in Patil when there is no rice because the stores sold out, he just returns empty handed having gone to buy when there wasn't any rice.
As for the person who doesn't believe a warning that there are raiders, he will be ensnared by something bad because he will be murdered.
A person who visited another place, didn’t stay very long then he returned home. If he stayed three days then he returned.
A person who was strong with little time elapse, he was able to finish his field.
As for the buriak spear, the shaft has been decorated and has been wrapped with bronze to make the shaft beautiful (lit. good to see) up to the reinforced tip.
The honey bees patiukan, tamo-ing tamusan and the wasps tabu-uan, lapinid, baga-baga, all have grubs. Those are their offspring.
When a woman is pregnant, her stomach protrudes; that is it becomes rounded.
As for the children, they blow up the balloon so that it will become rounded as it inflates.
A woman divided her hair into two parts as she rolls her hair into two pompadours one on each side of her head.
A turkey is the only “chicken” I know of that fluffs up. When it sees a person it fluffs itself up.
When Elena worked as a housegirl in Davao, she was given instructions to pour water on the flowers.
As she was pouring the water on the flowers, a lapinid wasp nest got wet and so she was stung.
Don’t sit on the sack of corn because it will spill out.
Pour out the corn which you will dry.
A person who has a bow and arrow set, that is a bow and arrow which is used to shoot if there is a blind for the birds.
Let's not take up residence with women. We will be cursed.
Return empty-handed
Murder
War
Murderer
Quickly
Cough
Salt
White millet
Spear
Fish eggs
Larvae
Protrude
Inflate
Fluff up
Pour
Spill
Spill
Pour out
Blisters
Large eyes
Hole
Foot sore
Evil spirit
Possessed
Spirit leader
Ghost
Bow
Curse
To curse
Be cursed
Male pig
Clouds
Tiny holes
Leaking item
Wart
Pollywog
Root for milk supply
If you purpose to make a purchase transaction, you will inquire and if [the other person] will give it, you will buy it.
If the [other person] agrees, you will make the purchase transaction.
It is still new material.
In our place, we don't show respect to someone unless they have been made a leader.
The rice was spilled and scattered from the basket; it was spilled and then scattered on the ground.
As for the unmarried men and the unmarried women, if there is a necklace or a bracelet of a leg band which they covet, they will be quick to ask for it.
As for that relentless pursuing, an unmarried man keeps coming back until he can obtain that which he is requesting. It is like the person from whom he is begging is being forced to give.
horse fight
Small bird
Blind
Purchase
Scrotum
Short and squat
Adult
Old
Mature
Ruler
Ancestor
Scatter
Land snail
Land snail
Curl up
Bent over
Request
Beg
Beggar
Donghuan was scared to death because he was thinking, “I will probably be eaten by this big python.”
She loved that man.
There is only one woman whom he loves.
If there are children who are eating and there is a lot of rice which falls to the floor, they are wasting the food.
There was a person who dismantled what wasn't his house and he destroyed the walls.
The reason my husband was murdered was because he was affected by the actions of Grandfather. That was the cause of the trouble.
If someone walks heavily and stomps their feet, those of us who are sleeping will be awakened.
If a horse runs, it makes a galloping sound.
If our companion passes on the other side of a trail, we will pass on this side as we hurry to meet him.
If we have a guest, those in another house hurry over to meet them and find out [about them].
If we have a companion who walks fast, we will hurry fast to catch up [with him.]
When we have been there for a day, we will continue to our true destination.
If we proceed directly to go home, we won't stop at different places enroute. We will go straight home.
The person who has a reason [to visit] us will go right ahead and tell us what his reason [for coming] is. He won't wait for the person of the house to ask the reason for his coming but he will just go ahead and say what he needs.
If we send someone to buy salt then he will come back without delay. After he makes the purchase, he will turn around and come right back.
If there are a lot of dirty spider webs, we brush off the webs (lit. houses) of the spiders so that they will be removed. When we brush them off, the debris drops to the floor.
When someone smokes, when the [cigarette] is finished burning, its ashes will drop off.
The eagle/hawk which is called a bird of prey is quick to swoop down and snatch the chicken’s chicks when it preys on them.
Don’t be in physical contact with me because you will catch my illness.
Our feet did not touch the cement.
Heaven and earth adjacent to each other.
Their two stomachs were touching (lit. kissing) each other.
Big
Feeling
Ruin
Affected
Splash (sound)
Stomp
Firm
Soft core
Very big
Hurry to meet
Continue
Sea
Drop out
Do briefly
Noise
Snatch
Adjacent
Contact (physical)
Skirt (traditional)
Shark fin
Celebration
Waning moon
Simultaneously
Needle
We will sleep outside on the ground on a certain mountain because there are many pigs I know about there.
If there are older people carrying on a conversation, there are younger people who are paying close attention as they listen.
The people whose languages became different, they were not being able to comprehend each other. They didn’t understand each other.
That word ig-agpas, you rush a person so that they will quickly finish something.
If there is someone whom we capture, we say, “Don’t resist because you are without recourse for you are surrounded.”
As for the house of a person which was leaning due to a strong wind, it was braced by its owner so that his house would not fall over.
When there are those traveling, we feel rushed as they are leaving.
The child repeatedly topples as it takes steps as it approaches its mother.
When they are placed over the fire, we expose the leaves to the heat to wilt the leaves so that they can be used to wrap food.
Don't play so much outside because you will happen to be in the path of evil spirit(s) which are en route to check out a dead person.
If someone is butchering a pig, water buffalo, or horse, we will command someone, “Go check it out because someone has butchered a pig. Get even one kilo.”
The moon has passed the zenith.
darken
rush someone
sleep on the ground
pay attention
to be reached
big
large
many
lot
profuse
very much
forceful
increase
excessively
bigger
size
exalt
love for someone
large pox
capture
cutting board
lovesick
become stormy
woven container
young lady
cliff
run an errand
path
nymph stage of cicada
expose to heat
approach
feel rushed
extended rainy spell
lean past zenith
root
getting roots
ends of the earth
ascent
If you have insomnia, you cannot sleep. You are always tossing and turning as you lay there and you are always sweating until it becomes morning.
The hens of the chicken, they likewise cluck as they express agreement with the rooster who is crowing.
We enter into the one singing a love song. We encourage them by saying, “Continue singing love songs.” By that means, we are entering into our mutual joy.
Even if it isn't our companion who has died if we empathize with their sorrow by weeping.
We will sleep outside on the ground; we will lay down there.
People who attend a spirit ceremony of a shaman, meet together as they listen to whatever the shaman is telling them.
As for a person who eats a lot, someone would say, "This person is too much who has nothing else to do than to be always eating.
But what happened to the one they were watching, that was the same thing which happened to their own offspring.
The people who are cutting the airstrip are lined up side by side facing upriver.
When we place something over the fire, we expose it to the heat of the fire so that it can be used for wrapping food.
honeycomb
mouth condition
sleeplessness
sweet potato tips
deep
under
inside
agree
empathize
sleep outside
moan
sickness
sick
menstruate
patient
cause illness
fret
mourn
buck deer
edible lizard
implicate
be implicated
thin rocks
sun-dry
water leech
arrive
touch
bamboo
attend ceremony
glutton
idle
result
line up
We warm ourselves by a fire if we are chilled when it is soon to dawn.
The width of the body to the beetle is nearly one inch.
The adolescent frog is becoming almost the same size as the mother in size.
When the flooded river water recedes, the thickness of the silt is a handspan deep.
When there is a wedding feast, and if there are some who are lacking rice (lit. food), we add to the rice for those who had insufficient.
The sun is setting when it goes past the mountain as it is disappearing over the horizon.
When we heat water, we set it aside because we will allow the water to cool off.
The birds flock together feeding on the fruits of the tree.
If the word is just daral, it's meaning is different because we are rushing our companion to do something.
If you have been caught by darkness, it will be difficult for you to arrive at your dwelling place because where you travel is dark.
When we have been there for a day, we will continue on to our true destination.
He is a good person because he makes sure that the money reaches the owner of the corn.
small yellow fruit
same kind
second
give two
handspan
they
large turtle
near
silt
add food
set
short eel
back away
locate
flock together
thumping
rush
two hundred
fast
press
dish
arrive
bounce
dish
rich
beach plant
leader
The cat pounced on a lizard upon which it was preying as it likewise was preying on a cockroach.
My good strength returned.
When we saw a log, we exert effort when we strain to pull back on the saw.
When in labor, the mother strains with much effort.
The reason why that tree is called dayuan is because the birds flock to it to pluck the baliti fruit.
When a person who is dying goes into a coma, he is unaware when we try to arouse him.
If a person walks and stomps, his steps are loud and we are awakened.
Our foot is lifted up as we take a step and then we step down.
If we have plants which are flowers, we will be careful when we step so that the flowers won't be accidentally stepped on.
We trample the rice stems which have been harvested so that the grains of rice can be dried in the sun.
I, however, avoid scandals because they make trouble. We shouldn't get involved in scandals about other people.
As for a nursing mother, she abstains from eating foods served at someone else's house in case it might cause the child to die.
Those were the animals God forbade them to eat.
If we are forbidden we are negatively-commanded not to do what we were told not to do.
Slice the cassava thinly because we will dry it after a while.
millet
sparse seedlings
prey
lament
strength
strain
strong person
proclaim
boastful
boast
decorate
well made
flock
short tree
heavy rain
unconscious
died
but
knife
step down
step
accidental step
thresh
there
go
downriver
book
peel
happen together
place together
strengthen
sturdy
hurt
bathe
bathe self
multiple bathing
bathing place
communal bath
swimwear
soaked
soaked leaves
here
avoid
forbid
slice
When we are listening to something, we cock our heads so that we can hear clearly.
His mother said, "Come here because I will listen to your stomach to find out why your stomach is growling."
If the place where our companion lives is far away, and if I would have liked to visit, it will be too far for me to go. I won’t be able to manage to go to that place because it is too far.
Grandfather Amasig heard that I was worried about my saw.
There were no more people; there was no more talking which we could hear.
We cause [people] to hear what we have to say.
Tongue
Lick
Tilt
Lean
Cock head
He
She
It
His
Hers
Its
Laugh together
Hear
Listen
Ignore
Necklace
Earthquake
There
Far
Upriver
Motor
Far
Distance
Remote
Too far
Contraceptive
Apply cure
Spirit
God
Gods
Rice
Part
Spur horse
Itch
Rash
Throw
Toss
Fall
Drop
Thrown at
Across
Cross
Bring across
Don't
However
Pound
Crush
Stick
Glue
Tape
Adhere
Light
Ignite
Sporadic
Rare
Scattered
Spear shaft
Dream omen
Spear shaft
Bird
Look down
Watch
Walk
Go
Wander
Destination
Black dog
Moonless
Leaf only
Bead
Dew
Look
Scan
Hate
Dwarf
Dwarf
The pots clanged as they hit each other.
Don’t clink the glasses together.
As for a person who is stepping down to the ground from his house, if he happens to be doing that at the same time a dove calls, he/she will not go ahead with climbing down to the ground.
If there is food there, there are people to be fed by you.
I am here beside you; I am here.
I saw the notebook which was here on top of the table.
I have an illness.
I have domesticated animals.
When we teach a child to write his/her name, we say, Do it like this to write. Included in the meaning is our demonstration as we teach.
Why did you behave like that toward your companion when he didn't have a fault to you?
That's how big it is.
Remember me; don’t forget me.
Think about me. [Take care of me.]
If we get a thorn in our foot, we will pick it out with a needle so that the thorn will be removed.
The piglet butts up against the tits so that the milk will become greater.
We have inadvertently interrupted you because you are eating.
When someone has just begun to harvest, other people cannot go there because the harvesters will suffer the negative result of being interrupted and become ill.
Past
Simultaneously
Clink
Bump
Finish eating
Quiet
Steady rain
Float
Emerge
Wash face
Arm span
Cloth
Think
Consider
Ponder
Remember
Care
Durable
Hard
Grip
Tie
Strengthen
Leaf
Use leaf
Call
Carefully
Repair
Forgive
Blessing
Behave
Brideprice
Only
Not quite
There is
Is here
Experience
Possess
Do this
Act
Love
Tie up
Dock
Two
Day before yesterday
Twenty
Every two days
Second
Doubt
Barter
Doubt
Thorn
Pricked
Attack
Nest
Make nest
Ulcer
Interrupt
Bump
Suffer
Mother returned home first because her breasts were already engorged with milk.
It is a tree that when struck with a knife its body bleeds.
If [one is] in Kapugi, the water rises. In respect to trees which replace their leaves, they shed.
The sea is rising.
The [water] of the Liboganon River doesn’t rise unless it floods. The [water] of the ocean rises but it still remains clear.
When it is already afternoon [about] three o’clock, the sun becomes obscured and the thunder clouds become dark.
The child who ate dulian fruit overate; his chest was hurting.
When Usì’s wife sows rice seed, she casts in all directions.
Dam
Engorged
Stab
Dagger
Tree
Pole
Draw near
Rise
Rise
Knife
Punch
Darken
Overeat
Slither
Work exchange
Awl
Refuse
Eaten
Urge
Creep
Scatter
Run
Durian
Peel
Flakes
Skin
Disease
Joists
Cobra
When a tree sheds its leaves, the leaves drop off when the wind blows against them.
The person next to me is my wife.
I moved next to Father to sleep.
If one moves very close, they are very near each other.
These sweet potatoes are crowding each other because they have many tubers (lit. fruits).
They are inadvertently sitting next to each other.
The lovers are moving close to each other.
If we approach someone we are the ones to come close to him.
As for the body of a ship, the bow, that is what goes first.
When the plane landed and the people helped deliver your things to the house, they took them all the way to the house. They took them directly upstairs. This is considered an act of service for which there is no charge.
We are chased by a pig which is protecting its offspring.
We didn’t know that others would arrive.
If we love our neighbors (lit. companion), they will also love us.
She assumes that she will accompany you to Nasuli.
Bring all of your children here...
If you are taken along to another work, you are drawn over to it.
If there is nothing for which you would clash with your companion, our interpersonal relationships will be good.
Our companionship has been cut off because we live far from each other.
The tree by the water is leaning over. Its tip is upside down.
I'll bend toward you (to delouse).
Those who are being deloused are being leaned over.
The tikò insect moves its head up and down when we hold onto its body.
Don't slouch; don't be bent over.
We will hunker down if we hide.
We have to be hunkered down because we are afraid that we might be seen.
Is the cat perhaps older than the horse?
Go over there.
Take it over there.
We had just barely sat down when guests arrived and caught us as we were eating.
When someone sings oggung style, the one who sings to an accompaniment is the same one who plays the saluroy instrument.
Shed
Shed
Move close
Approach
Crowd
Together
Close
Approach
Gather
Bow
Deliver
Chased
Companion
Accompany
Bring
Take
Relationship
Member
Mixed rice
Intrude
Flea
Lean
Lean
Huddle
Nod
Nod
Move head
Slouch
Hunker
Hide
Tobacco
Second wife
Skin disease
Night
Dark
Nightfall
Benighted
Predawn
Collision
Push
Than
Of
Pluck
Pulled
There
Go there
Catch
Hammock
Lizard
Sing
As for poison, whatever is able to poison such as tayuran.
As for others, rat poison can poison an enemy.
As for a hex, it is placed on us so that we will quickly die.
We'll be poisoned or hexed.
When we wash clothes, even if there isn't very much sunshine we can still dry them in the sun because they will still become dry if they will be blown in the wind.
If or when a spring is new, it cannot be stretched because it is strong.
We are ten people who will reciprocally help one another to cut fields.
We drag the rattan when we return to the house.
When we go downriver by raft, when we return we pull the gakit in going upriver against the current.
The carabao which is pulling a cart as it hauls corn will experience difficulty if there are those who ride on it.
If there is a jeep which is broken down which needs to be taken to a shop for repair, they also have it towed by another jeep.
Those in Sulit, Langilan, Banuwaloy, Kapugi, and Pipisan, that is the word they use.
If there are two people who are going downriver by raft and one goes ahead of the other, the one left behind will chase the one which got ahead and will catch up with him.
If someone is fleeing, we pursue them so that we will catch up with them.
The thick, black clouds are thunderheads. Those will cause it to rain.
The black thunderheads, if they become white, they will cause it to rain hard.
The misty rain, it comes from the fog which drips.
Smooth bamboo is cut and trimmed by a person to use to make a wall for his house.
The person who is emaciated has hardly any flesh left on his or her body.
The corn will be skinny. The ears will be small.
For example, if someone is getting married, the only thing they will be discussing is how much brideprice they will give up front for that girl.
When a person becomes emaciated, the side of his hip bone protrudes.
As for the person who has many visible veins, his veins can be seen because they protrude.
Take back
Poison
Hex
Cloth
Dry
Band
Spring
Chubby
Pull
Earlier
Pack
Commune
Necromancer
Reciprocate
Help
Raft
Drag
Cotton
Tree
Camote
Chase
Pursue
Cloud
Pile
Trim
Skinny
Emaciated
Brideprice
Pay
Payment
Milk
Vine
Protrude
Veiny
Hundred
A hundred
Trip
Clear
Vines
The person who gets provoked, even if what we say is small, he/she will be quick to become angry.
That's all right because I will just return soon.
As for aluminum roofing which is very thin, it easily becomes dented when we step on it as we are using it to make a roof.
His/her emotions are easily upset.
Hurry up and take it to its owner. We have them hurry to have it taken to its owner.
We had a saw which was an instrument for cutting off roofing.
There was a person who was sawing togop wood into boards.
We'll be cursed for wasting the rice.
The kalayag spirit will punish.
Yesterday is the day which has just passed.
Day before yesterday.
When we clear debris from the yard, anything can be used to shove aside the fallen leaves and then we carry it to a far place.
As for a stream that was cleared of debris, the debris was gathered together at the side of the stream.
If someone arrives at someone's house who is hungry, he is given something to eat from the leftovers to temporarily satiate his hunger. Then the host/hostess cooks again that which he/she will feed their guests.
I eat something to satiate my hunger and so I eat a little so that my hunger will be held off.
I had to eat some food to temporarily satiate my hunger.
When your foot almost slipped from the step and you quickly grabbed something, you were almost .....??.... You didn't quite continue to fall from the stairs.
This stupid stairway which scares so that I nearly fell.
There is a child whose teeth are far apart. His teeth have open spaces between them.
When you make a fish trap, it is loosely woven. The body of the fishtrap is loosely woven and the prongs are also far apart.
When the mother of a child goes to weed her field, she leaves her child in the care of someone else and that person watches over him/her.
Taganay is the one who took care of Lita's children who were left behind.
A mother leaves rice behind for gruel to be fed to her child.
When we die, our possessions are simply left behind and cannot be taken where we will be after we die.
We split open the pula palm tree which we have notched and then we see many white grubs which are squirming.
As for the body of that pula palm, we will knotch it to cultivate grubs.
We will wait three months before we look at the log which we have knotted to cultivate grubs to see if there are now white grubs.
A fistful is taking a large handful of food.
Why did you take a huge fistful of rice when we are really many?
It isn't fair that the food is being consumed so we won't have enough because someone takes a huge fistful of rice.
When you happen to encounter the gamowgamow spirit, the reason for your illness is because you become tangled up in her long hair.
Improper sitting
Fast
Soon
Easily
Harvest
Kerosene
Past
Saw
Cursed
Yesterday
Scratch
Clear
Satiate
Climb up
Bank
Undershirt
Raft
Edge
Sharp
Wide-spread
Loose
Leave in care
Take care
Leave for someone
Leave behind
Notch
Spikes
Wart
Fistful
Spirit
My uncle said, "Let's be alert because this is his trick."
If you are enticed to sin, you are being deceived.
You just used it to trick us so that you would be able to sow your field.
Tungonu is the oldest, after him comes Dusing's mother, after Dusing's mother comes Luluy's mother.
Lugtom has the older-younger sibling relationship with Gibangon.
This house was completed.
The person who laughs without showing his teeth keeps his mouth closed when he laughs. Just some people do that.
There is poisonous sap in the seeds of the pangi and in the kolut tuber.
trick
deceive
dried tobacco
heap of tobacco
hold on lap
younger sibling
sibling relationship
left
to one's left
cut into strips
scraps
cut neck
complete
rat trap
drum
smile
open eyes
sight restored
soul
dream self
smile
smile closed mouth
large fish
carve
knowledge
know something
collar
basket
haircut
shed fur
rot from water
war
tear
rip
field treatment plant
cracked
wounded
juice
There was someone who smoothed off his lumber with a knife with which he was making a house.
Why is it that I am the one from whom you confiscate a horse for a debt when I have no debt to you?
Everything which lives, all of us here on earth die.
When I internalized or believed in Jesus...
How can you be so confident!
If we see someone to whom we are related whom we have not yet met, we feel confident toward him.
We will plant camote stems today because we have burned our fields.
If the wild pig is here in the middle, the people will surround it as they come out of hiding to attack it.
As for one person, he or she waits in readiness to spear that hoop which will be rolling.
The children who are playing ambush their companions on the path.
excited to ride airplane
lumber
wood poles
seize
confiscate
reclaim
variant of gakap
plant rice off-season
accuse falsely
crunchy sound
crunch walking dry vegetation
wheezy lung sound
breath
alive
desire
preference
breathe
internalize
believe
confident
unconcerned
bend body in half
forested hill
greedy
chop huge tree
wrinkle
skin groove
palm line
plant stem
doorway
go up
climb mountain
enter house
grasp
hold onto
feel cold
feel cold
manage
handle
break jaw
break
crack
lie in wait
ambush
ambush game
be ambushed
The ties, those are the reinforcing ties.
We reinforce the braces of a shield by tying them so that they will be strong.
We felt his foot.
He/she is experiencing malaria.
If we experience swelling which has not yet burst, our lymph nodes here in our groin will hurt.
As for a person who walks on the floor, his stepping forcefully makes a creaking noise.
The field which has been rained on for three days becomes dry and crackling when it has been drying in the sun for three days.
When the sunshine began, that was that which caused the field to dry to a crisp.
As for our bodies, the pain of tingling is like the pain of being repeatedly poked by needles.
If there are six crosswise slices, that is enough for one each as we are six people.
A crosswise piece, that is the body of a fish which is repeatedly chopped off.
Slice it crosswise.
Dulian fruit when it is ripe breaks off at the stem where it attaches to the fruit.
When we cut down vines for a useful purpose, we cut off the stalks lit. body of the rattan and we take them.
A crosswise slice, we sever by cutting off with a saw-like motion.
When a Manobo violin is played, its string is rubbed back and forth by its bow.
The roasted kernels of corn is fed to the mother who has newly given birth so that the blood clots will be discharged from her body.
A tree that is being felled makes a loud cracking sound as it falls over.
Stir what is being dried in the sun so that it will become dry.
When the raft passed through the shallow water, the rattan which was used for holding it together was chewed off and severed by the stones.
Split up that piece of wood; cut it in half, One splits it length-wise with the grain.
When there are raiders, those are the ones who attack and kill people.
The two countries are at war with each other.
I’ll relate this story/information to you.
Tell things about your living situation.
He would answer, "This is the news which I have to tell about our place."
Household knife
Reinforcing ties
Experience
Feel
Be bothered
Malaria
Noise when walking on bamboo floor
Very dry and crackling
Roof poles
Cracking sound
Crosswise slices
Break off at stem and fall
Cut rattan
Cut vines
Sawing motion
Cutting
Roast corn kernels
Pop like popcorn
Stomach
Abdomen
Belly
Tie together
Loud cracking sound
Stir
Tie together to stabilize
Split wood
Attack
Fight
Be at war
Tell
Relate
Sternum
Cartilage appendage to ribs
Become tangled
As for the kisulà plant, its body is like upu and its fruit is long and grooved.
You may die of hunger.
mussed hair
wrinkled clothing
walk noisily
run noisily
want
like
impatient
excited
rib
grooved
hunger
be hungry
be hungry
bloated stomach
gorged stomach
recipe or meat/veggie mix
sunny weather
dry weather
dry season
dismantle
come apart
disheveled
explosive
twist
stir
move in all directions
wiggle
cut wood pieces
bonanza
massacre
make noise
noisy
gurgling sound
rubber
clattering sound
large camote
old man
loose tooth
stir liquid
eggbeater
roam buying horses
scissors
cut with scissors
pick tree fruit
chop pieces
scissors
cut with scissors
shake off water
split
insult
If we place the radio on the floor, it is likely that it will be stepped on or come apart.
My nylon cord fell from the table and became tangled because it became dishevelled because it came off of the spool.
Is your lip twisted?
When many children are playing, they move about in all directions as they don't stay in one place. They are going in different directions.
The tails of the piglets wiggle as they move about.
There was a person who got a bonanza of a large amount of fish which he caught with a net.
When there was someone who killed a family, the raiders massacred them and everyone died.
If one frequently wins at gambling, he always hits the jackpot.
When it is dry season, then the sunny period is prolonged and the creeks become puddles as they dry up from the dry weather.
They cut the meat up and then divided it into shares and then they had the person who carried the pig on his back take the head.
We split or open up the notched pula palm log and then we see many grubs which are squirming.
What relation to Lugtom is Sanglit?
Yes, you have decreased in girth. Your waist has become smaller.
As for cats, when they are in heat or their time of mating arrives, they are always meowing when it is night time.
When it is becoming dawn, the wind is cold and we feel cold.
We have chills when we are ill.
We will warm ourselves by a fire if we are chilled.
We miss, are cold, for our companion when it has been a long time since we have seen each other. It means we are lonely.
When you have seen each other, you tell that person that you will sleep together for a while because you have been chilled by your loneliness.
After ten minutes the bleeding stopped.
He/she will quit eating.
I will move to another place for a while.
That disease will be transmitted if we lay side by side with a person who has the alap-ap white skin fungal disease.
If your love lit. breath does not become transferred to another man, I will be able to follow through to marry you.
That bread on which you spread a layer of peanut butter, that is the sandwiched peanut butter.
What relation
Whose
Mold
Mildew
Cracked feet
Insult (faces)
Insult (eyelids)
Weave
Cradle cloth
Stomach pain
Shrink
Shred abaca
Mate (animals)
Greedy
Selfish
Unwilling to share
Out-of-breath sound
Overeat
Ladder
Notched pole
Cold
Chills
Miss someone
Stop
Quit activity
Scoop (hands)
Bolo string
Panting (dogs)
Exchange
Move
Transfer
Transmit disease
Change (love)
Hide behind
Hiding place
Tuck in
Place between
Sandwich
Touch and lick fingers
Sop meat juice
Even the ghosts, they groan because they are intentionally trying to scare us.
When ghosts try to scare us, at first they say, "Mmm." After that, they make things drop in front of us.
There are people who will hide whose purpose is to scare us so that we will be afraid.
What we are looking at has become blurry; we cannot see the writing clearly.
That woman is a greedy person; she ate up all the rice and didn't leave any rice for her husband.
I don't know.
How should I know?
I refuse to have anything to do with you.
I don't know.
Wild pig calling its young
Afraid
Try to scare
Frighten each other
Overcast
Sun hidden by clouds
Blurry screen
Sore ribs
Playfully threaten
Large
Happy
Used for killing fish
Growl
Tin can for cooking
Pant
Out of breath
Sniff
Greedy person
Knowledge
Ignore
Claim not to know
Forget someone died
Gamble with dice
Chicken roost
Roost
Satisfied
Full (from food)
Continue
Hair-growth vine
Unknown use
Whip
Chicken lice
Transferable to people
Abaca bugs
Afternoon
Be benighted
Pay later
Fire
Make fire
Radio
The teacher who returned to Maniki, they took her as far as Patil as they escorted her.
Escort this young man to the leader of the soldiers because he has something to tell him.
Deliver it quickly. We rush the delivery of something (cause the delivery to be quick).
The dump truck which delivered the rocks, then spills them out.
If you throw away trash, you take it to the receptacle.
The person who was given responsibility to feed the pig did not consent to give the half of the piglets to the owner.
So therefore the owner took back the mother pig.
When someone is in labor, the mother strains with much effort.
When we heat water, we set it aside because we allow the water to cool off.
When the water has cooled off, we will drink it.
We will let our companion know that we have guests who have arrived.
The rice which is being sunned is being caused to dry.
In our place, there are strong winds which are carried by whirlwinds which are able to blow off a roof.
As for a pig which is pregnant, her stomach alternately bulges as the unborn piglets move about.
There are many grubs which are squirming.
In the market the catfish placed in the metal basin were writhing.
Younger sibling
Younger cousin
Older-younger sibling relationship
Sibling relationship
Children born close together
Younger
Sniff at cheek
Kiss
Touch each other
Grater
Scrape
Grate
Shred
Rootless camotes
Swim like eel
Escort
Deliver
Nickname
Shared name
Friendship name
Tantalize
Tease
Waist
Slim
Kind of sugarcane
Hold back
Dissuade
Kill to prevent return
Take back
Retrieve
Recover
Childbirth labor
Labor pains
Let
Allow
Permit
Make happen
Pack up
Blow off (wind)
Lifted off (wind)
Lie on back
Wrinkled
Shrivel
Vow
Swear
Move about
Squirm
Writhe
Smear
Spread on
Tear
Rip
Stand on tiptoe
Slice rattan small
Small
As for Filipinos, it is their custom to noisily slurp their soup.
Why did you break/snap the rope/rattan by which my raft was attached to the shore?
Tie the goat to something because it is eating the plants.
If we are not entangled by sufferings..
Mother is frustrated with her field because her rice has many weeds.
She says that her rice will be wasted because she cannot finish weeding the field.
The head of a turtle is pulled back and inside its body.
The snake which goes inside a hole, it also pulls back and inside its hole.
In the afternoon, the leaves of the baluy are smoothed out and flattened with a corn cob so they can be tightly rolled up.
Someone places a noose beside the nest of a dove. Then he shooed the dove and then the neck of the dove was caught in the noose because the noose tightened around its neck.
Have pity on me.
That which we would have done at the beginning was supplanted and so then we were distracted to something else so that we didn't accomplish what we started out to do.
In our place, we don't show respect to someone unless they have been made a leader.
But these days, cassava is now being used to make agkud.
When two days of this process has been completed, finally that agkud can be eaten.
Tiny mosquito
Swarms animals at night
Slurp
Concave side of shield
Locust
Look here
Attachment
Tether
Reserve
Entangled
Most
Mess with
Mate with
Mosquito
Cut grass
Weeds
Weed garden
Slice
Field house
Pull inside
Massage
Flatten
Raw
Unripe
Eat raw food
Forest
Poison
Noose
Rat trap
Bridle horse
Adjust bones
Disappointed
Vision
Decorated person
Rest
Place to rest
Pity
Pick up
Do
Make
Be given position
Make from something
Making process
The manipulation of childbirth is like pushing but just gently.
The brightness of a glow is faint.
The dog who is a nursing mother, when she playfully bites her offspring, she plays with her offspring. She gently bites her offspring.
Turn the radio down.
When we have guests, when the food is served, we get it started by saying, "Friend, let’s eat now." We are inviting him to come and eat.
If someone is ill, that is the person over which a shaman will perform a pig sacrifice.
We will warm ourselves by a fire if we are chilled.
The person whose legs are crippled, he scoots as he moves along.
If you are caught on the trail at nighttime, it is difficult for you to get to your place because your pathway is dark.
When there was a person who was in difficulty who was going to another house, he asked for help.
He will continuously discuss it with the father of the girl until he agrees.
The ground is sloping.
gently
soft
faint
invite
take along
bring along
lengthen
a vine for hair growth
shaman ceremony
fry
roast meat
warm oneself
feathery hair of bamboo
become warm and prickly
strain
bear down
immediately
as soon as
ripe
white rice
walk
travel
close one’s eyelids
difficult
dangerous
sleep
squint
blow
yes
serve
lift out
squeeze
milk
sloping land
four
forty
four each
four things
fourth
green
unseasoned (as wood)
sacrifice a pig when fasting
take a break (by changing location and activities away from home)
take a holiday or vacation
take a day off from regular activities
yawn
show compassion
feel sorry for
pity
compassionate
want sympathy
plead for mercy
tendons
defecate
have dysentery (of baby only)
agree to marriage
consent to marriage
fiber from palm tree used for starting fire
sweet palm drink (from fish palm)
loose (as floor bamboos)
wiggly
remove what is caught from a trap
start eating (because food is ready)
ritual when someone dies (village moves to river junction to deceive spirits)
a kind of tree
slide down a tree
climb down
draw a bolo (from sheath)
suffer a change of circumstances
break through
bark (as a dog corners a rat)
lie side by side
sleep together (as husband and wife)
work
perform activity with hands
sleep deeply
gather together (as flies, ants, birds, or fish to feed)
to command someone to go and do something
habitually command (prerogative of igbuyag)
to persuade (by talking into) as a girl to sing
to tighten something; pull taut
to strengthen (as one's faith)
to be taut, tightened
grunt of a pig, especially when frightened
to untie (as shoes or an animal)
to become unraveled
to intentionally unravel something
I'm after the house that Jeremy made but I don't yet have anything with which to pay.
That which he attributed to another person was his means of hiding his fault.
They moved to Maambago because they had made a new airstrip.
When the old leaves have come off, they are replaced by new leaves and the tree buds with flowers.
As for that lady teacher, she had just newly died.
When the sun has newly arisen, as for a house, it will be struck by the rays of the sun and the shadow will become long.
He made the cloth like new.
The corn won’t sprout because the small ants are affecting it.
As for that anit taboo, they say it is God's punishment for messing around with creatures because, as for the creatures, they don’t bother people.
I’m asking for water because I am thirsty.
Take something. Choose that which you are hungry for.
Whatever he/she strongly desires, he/she buys it.
There are days when we don’t have an appetite. We choose what we desire to eat.
There was a newly married couple, and when the woman was in the beginning of pregnancy, she strongly craved the mango fruit and so she forced her spouse to get a mango for her. Later, when it was already there, she was no longer hungry for it.
new
newly
make something like new
craving
thirst
asking
requesting
sprout
grow
affect
attack
teacher
house
cloth
sun
rays
shadow
Address to a little girl
Urinate
Potty or bladder
Guarantee
Downpayment
Go away for a period of time to test one's love
Forgive
Urinate
Bladder
Woven mat for sleeping or drying grains
Tail
Tailed creature
Follow a trail
Retrace steps
Follow a scent
Chew meat from bone
Fillet
Freckle
Freckled
Wild
Small knife or dagger
Small black fish (minnow)
Light
Glow
Transparent
Kind of red rice
Clear (as water)
Get free (as a fish from a hook)
Take refuge
Hole up (as in a stronghold)
Imitate
Copy
Examine
Resemble
Be like
Scrutinize
Outer side
Change clothes
Spit
Cough up
Vomit
If there is a horse which I will reserve, I will give a pig as a downpayment. That is my guarantee that I have reserved it.
What I said to the girl was, "Let's go away for a period of time to test our feelings. We will make an agreement for one year or two years, and if your love doesn't transfer to another man, I will follow through to marry you."
The buses and jeeps which pass along the highway, follow their path.
My father said, "Start your motor because I will go first, and you will follow my motorboat wherever I go."
When we returned to Patil, the bag dropped down onto the path, so we returned looking for it, and we retraced our steps so that we would see it.
A dog who is hunting a pig smells the footprints of the pig and then follows the scent.
If we eat something that still has a bone, we chew on it until it is stripped of meat.
When the pig has been cooked, they strip the meat from the bone which still has meat; they cut off every bit of meat from the bone until bone is all that is left.
As for the flesh of large fish, the bones can be filleted; the bones are removed.
If we go inside a cavern, there will be light in front of us.
If there is thin material, we can see through it because the light goes through it.
A house, if it only has glass windows, they are transparent because we can see through to the other side because our view is unobstructed.
When someone holes-up, we stay there in the mountains. We take refuge when there are raiders.
A person would say something like, "What is that dog after?"
The reason for our slowness to purchase the axe is because we will examine it to see whether it has a crack.
He keeps coming back until he can obtain that which he is requesting. It is as though the person from whom he is begging is being forced to give.
You look around to see if there are any more.
The person who coughs up blood, that is related to an illness.
When we are nauseated, we spit up our saliva, and if we have food we have eaten, then it will be vomited. If we are continually nauseated, we will repeatedly vomit up that which we have eaten.
The child who nurses and doesn't burp, it will happen to vomit up the milk.
Jesus disappeared when He entered because His stones shone as they were filled with light.
If he scoots, it is just one short motion.
The child who turns over on its stomach, scoots forward as it crawls.
The person whose legs are crippled, scoots forward as he moves about.
If a child sits, he also scoots forward if he cannot yet stand up.
When the child inches forward, the midwife causes it to accompany her hands.
When the child crawls, it also moves forward.
We are out of betelchew.
The betelnut is lacking.
I'll be expecting your return on that third day.
If one uses the word "kun," he doesn’t yet depend on it as true.
If you fail to show up on the day of your return, I will expect that what you say is not valid.
We are expecting that we have something good.
They will make up games to comfort those whose breath is hurting.
You were generous toward Maambago.
If he cries to go along, he wants to go with his mother.
A child cries for her if he is searching for his mother.
If it is an adult who cries to go along, he will pressure the person into letting him come.
When a chicken is a mother, it goes ahead of its chicks when it scratches as it looks for something to have her offspring eat.
The older sibling has the younger sibling lead on the trail.
The one to be born first is the younger sibling because he is put in the lead by the elder sibling.
If there are those in some village who are under someone's authority, it's as though they are all his subjects.
If there is a horse which I will reserve, I will give a pig as a downpayment.
When we have discovered the date which is open, we set that day for gathering together.
You won't be able to take it until there is something to use as a guarantee which makes the agreement about when you will pay the remainder.
There is a kind of rain which we call saginwalu.
If there is a child who is always crying, that is a sign that raiders will arrive.
green
blue
disappear
become ethereal
to be orphaned by at least one parent
a kind of wood
scoot forward
draw near
phase of the moon
move forward slowly
a kind of hard wood
run out of something
lack
envy
be envious
covet
arouse envy
expect
depend on
expect
having no mother
orphaned
appease
pacify
comfort
persuade
limp
cry for someone
cry at being left behind
go ahead of
put someone in front
follow around
large tuberous vegetable
type of song
seem like
have the appearance of something
colorfully-patterned abaca skirt
story song
remember
reserve
establish
set, as a date
guarantee
promise
signify
reserve or engage
a sign
feces
defecate
toilet
small non-poisonous snake
Whether women or men, the relationship of the spouses of their siblings is called patala-iras "spouses-in-law."
If two siblings have spouses, they call each other iras.
They call the spouse of his/her sibling iras.
The spouse of my brother-in-law is my spouse-in-law.
A house, if it only has glass windows, they are transparent because we can see through to the other side because our view is unobstructed.
When we look in a mirror, we see our reflection.
We pour water when we want to drink.
When we go on an errand to the forest and there is no water nearby, we cut a vine and pour its water out and drink it because we are thirsty.
When a bamboo water pole tips over, the water spills but it is slow to go out because the mouth is narrow.
The thick cloud which is dark is a thunder cloud.
Igì’s hair is very black.
There is dark skin and there is somewhat dark skin.
As for soot, if we happen to rub it on ourselves, our body and our clothes become black.
When the head of a turtle retracts inside its shell, it moves backwards and goes inside its shell.
When a rubber band pulls back, it also retracts.
His fever decreased.
You finally purchased the axe because its price was reduced.
A dog when it gives birth, puppy is the name of its offspring.
The name of the offspring of a weasel or a mongoose is also pup.
relationship between spouses of people married to siblings
spouse of one's ipag or boyow if that person is not one's own sibling
smart
wise
shrewd
point of knife
sharpen with a knife
sharpener, as for a pencil
bolo
nose
one (used in counting)
obtain viand
diligently search for viand or camotes during hunger season
flashlight
glass
mirror
matches
graze, as spear or bullet
move backwards
disagreement
rejected suitor
infected teeth from not brushing
gnaw, as a dog gnaws a bone
small goose
pour
spill, as water or other liquids
dark color
black
to become black
move or walk backwards
retract
decrease, as temperature or blood pressure
reduce, as a price
offspring of a dog, weasel, or mongoose
to have sexual relations
kind of camote with reddish skin and white inside with a purplish ring
kind of small thin banana
The meaning is jumbled when there are words which don't fit.
A person who makes a recipe from the tubod plant, grates coconut with which he makes coconut milk.
The child who happened to trip and fall, scraped his leg and it was abraded.
Asat grated the coconut.
The fire flares up.
But if there is a means of defense, we who are living there won’t feel insecure because our living situation will be secure.
A red multicolored chicken went wild and changed into a wild chicken.
talk
word
speak
language
manner of speaking
scrape
kind of rattan fruit
outside marks of a tattoo
headband decorated with beads
kind of palm tree
too big
loose
one-stringed violin
chiggers or very small creatures
germs that spread disease
wooden hoe-like instrument
metal hoe
scrape out or grate
coconut shredder
shake a container to check for liquid
rattle
here
right here
come here
older sibling or relative
younger-older relationship
fan, as a fire
flame up, as fire when fanned
carabao
nail
jail
slice vegetables
slices prepared for cooking
wind
air
kind of apusow (white)
kind of weed that emits an irritating gas
cogon grass
name of a village in the Kapugi area
small bat
narrow wooden shield
means of defense
lizard with large high spines on the back
wild chicken
kind of red rice
red, multicolored chicken that turned wild
As for a ladder, it has two leaning posts and there are cross-pieces.
That which we step on are the steps.
Estimate the length of the dress.
Estimate the height of the tree which has not yet been felled.
There is no one to watch her children so she won't be able to dig camotes.
The soldiers mistook us for someone else because they mistakenly supposed that we were the ones they were searching for who had escaped from the prison.
We have become white-headed from grey hairs.
ladder with rungs
rungs of a ladder
steps to a porch or on a hillside
turmeric plant used to cook with meat
fragrant
yellow
spear with detachable barbed head held in place with a rope
length
height
shellfish like a small clam
dig
dig up
dig camotes
kind of tree with red wood and bark
similar to lawa-an
good for making lumber
kind of hornbill
kind of taro with red stalks
world
universe
fifty
mistake someone for another person
poetic term for kiss
white-headed when all hairs have turned grey
tune of kobbiung or kuglung
wild betelnut with a smaller nut
youngest child in a family
scratch, as in dirt like a chicken
a spirit who accompanies Imbabasuk
to boil a liquid
frying pan
a place in Kapugi
guavano
large wart
edible ferns
Whose
On the verge of fainting; To be discouraged
The
Non-intentive mode prefix of an action or event which is abilitative, non-intentional
Ancestors
Clearing; atmosphere near the earth
For goodness sake!
Butterfly; moth
A reddish color nocturnal animal similar to a sloth
Die
Cloth or abaka fiber bag worn on the back
Kind of red camote
Large fruit bat
Hawk or hawk-eagle
Hawk or hawk-eagle resembling a sparrow hawk
Kind of bird weighing around 3 kilos
Chocolate brown chicken
Corn cob with missing grains
To die before one harvests his field
Illness and headache caused by crying or skipping meals
Unravel as thread of a net or woven material
Ravelling, as from material or thread unwound from a spool
Bite
Dog which bites
The kabal hangs back-side down when it walks and is exceedingly slow to move.
My cloth backpack is lightweight.
The ear of corn in which the grains have not filled in, is corn which has not reached completion.
A person who makes a field for his yearly crop of rice but doesn't live to harvest his rice because he has died, he has died before reaching his harvest and so did not get to eat his rice.
A child who was continuously crying because he cried for his mother who was weeding a field, has an illness and headache caused by crying because he is becoming ill.
A fishing net will ravel if it is caught on something unless it is knotted as it is being made.
The kabugkul hawk/eagle is greedy for chicks.
Shell, of an egg or crab
Succumb
The shell and membrane of an egg
A black bird
A tan-colored, lacy-like edible fungus
Scratch with claws
Small red-breasted parrot resembling a "love bird"
Girlfriend or boyfriend
A type of tree
A hat
Sharpening stone, whetstone
Pestle with a carved top
To make a rhythmic noise with the pestle
To be stained, as a shirt
A kind of breadfruit
Goat
Type of shellfish found in fresh water
A reddish-brown and orange chicken with long feet
An eye condition characterized by redness; pink eye
A metal band reinforcing a bolo handle or spear shaft
Beetle
Wrist
Wet to some degree; damp
A cut field, of rice or other grain; year
To cut a field, especially with a bolo
Time of cutting rice field
Praying mantis
Beckon
Finger (person, crab, shrimp)
To swim overhand; to wave arms around
A warrior's knife used to kill people
They will quickly succumb to death because they are always bowing their heads.
The outside layer of an egg including the membrane, that is the kalungon.
The offspring of the beetles are the alibutod, katod, and langgi-on grubs.
The agalayan is a wide field. It is all corn.
The kampilan is a warrior's knife used to kill people.
The kamiara chicken is large and tall.
A fishing net will ravel if it is caught on something unless it is knotted as it is being made.
papaya
medicinal plant
grass
tree with cotton-like pods
adhere
posterity
descendant
characteristic passed down
present child to grandparents
gift for grandparents
hired hand for harvest
hire for harvest
chain
discouraged
give up
crayfish
stepping sound
cicada
wedding
feast
camote
shy
embarrassed
ashamed
load gun
bat
rooster snare
throw tantrum
woman tantrum
As for the kapigsula plant, it sprouts on the beach and is used to treat double-skin and a white skin fungus.
If we have one girl offspring, we will present her to her paternal grandparents.
I’ll hire on with you to go downriver by raft because I don’t have any money now.
There was a person who was looking for someone to hire because he had twenty sacks of corn but no one to be his partner when he traveled downriver on his raft.
If the tail of a puppy is tipped with white, people will not make a pet of it because they think it is bad luck.
If the tips of a carabao’s horns are white, people will not make a pet of it because they suppose that it will horn people.
As for our daughter, she wandered around and got lost.
When a monkey scolds a person, he throws a tantrum as he shakes the branch where he lives.
As for a ladder, it has two leaning posts which have pieces that are laid horizontally, and those are the steps.
That which we step on are the steps.
When someone gravels a road, that is what is meant by scattering rocks.
Rocks are what have been intentionally scattered over the path.
When I took the termite dust and sprinkled it outside, I scattered it on the ground.
If a rope is pulled out from a spool, it will be stretched out.
Joaquin is still the one who has the authority of being the captain of Barangay Gupitan.
If a person has great authority or great knowledge, he/she is called a great person.
The elders who are leaders are the ones who have the responsibility for the various areas.
The person who is rained on gets soaked by the rain when he gets wet.
When a child walks as he is playing and lifts his foot above his waist, his legs are also spread apart.
outrigger
outhouse
ladder
scatter
intentionally scatter
be scattered
unstring
grub
authority
responsibility
remedy
chili peppers
container
soaked
fish hook
right hand
bamboo
cooking pot
wing
braid
wiggle
lift legs
active
wiggly
white-tailed rat
red tree fruit
small ant
hornbill
finger
crab appendage
hair standing up
A person who hops steps with just one foot.
If the leg is in pain, the person will limp when walking and won’t be able to step properly.
But the sand by the ocean sparkles.
As for the Visayan's cross-like symbol, it just has one crosspiece and the purpose is to ward off evil spirits.
As for the Manobo's cross-like symbol, it has two crosspieces of wood and is used to mark a field to be cut.
If we have forgotten where something is, we keep searching as we look for it until we are able to find it.
Whatever we request, we tell our companion whatever it is that we need.
become smaller
hop
limp
shirt
chicken carrier
sparkle
herbal remedy
symbol
field marker
twitch
screech
grimace
shave hair
climbing plant
rub clothes
see
find
view
fish hook
overnight fishing
hold hands
tickle
crooked mouth
if
which
whenever
reason
whatever
The people who had ridden the jeep that crashed with another vehicle were caught in a disaster they did not foresee.
The person who died was caused to meet a disaster because he had accompanied the others.
The uncle of the young man forced his nephew into a bad situation because he had him marry someone for whom he did not yet have a desire to marry.
This is said to a new guest who is shy to take very much food: "Eat up!"
If my child takes the opportunity to eat at someone else's house without my permission, I will scold him/her.
Quit talking because I am getting fed up with you, and I will have to get back at you.
He feels frustrated because he has no more recourse.
A person who cannot endure weeding his rice field will quickly become frustrated and will stop working before finishing.
When there is a dry spell, the ground becomes difficult to dig.
disaster
cause disaster
forced into bad situation
how is/are
eat
eat up
have plenty to eat
in the process of eating
avail of eating opportunity
edible
food
become frustrated
fed up
without recourse
itchy skin disease
bamboo zither
play kobbiung
softened cooked food
cook
mane
chomp
pick
pluck
embarrassed
pinch
pinch each other
rim
finish rim
regain shape
wrinkle forehead
I
energetic
wrap tightly
bind
squeeze
hard
bad
firm
difficult
secure
infected sore
infected sores
We avoid going inside a house if women are the only ones staying there.
If we ask about it, we won't go inside the house if their men are not there so that we won’t be falsely accused.
The person who is unhesitant goes ahead and states his purpose.
A person hesitates to speak because he is shy to talk to his companion if he has something he needs.
The person who dries rice in the sun frequently stirs and spreads it around.
A person who has no love for his companion ostracizes him.
The fish hardens when we put it in the freezer.
If someone shivers, they begin to have chills.
A person who has chills feels cold because they have malaria.
A person who stuffs his mouth with food makes a fistful of food and feeds himself.
As for aluminum roofing which is very thin, it easily becomes dented when we step on it while using it to make a roof.
headband
avoid something
hesitant
finicky
squirrel
grunt
depressed
discouraged
stir
sweep aside
ostracize
nudge
flick off
spear
farewell gift
fall off
flick
woodpecker
green parrot
shiver
tremble
sick
harden
stiff
turn
turn
shake head
fungus
small
fungus
coconut juice
starchy tuber with heart-shaped leaves, requires soaking to remove poison
wear a wrap-around skirt high enough to cover breasts
basket
eat
eat
bent
If a child is extremely hot, he will jerk.
A person who is cleaning under the house pushes aside the debris.
If a child becomes lame, one foot will draw up.
When the twin-engine airplane flies, its wheels retract.
If someone shivers, they begin to have chills.
A person who has chills feels cold because they have malaria.
You led each other to embrace because you had been reconciled.
If someone has an infected sore, he will peel off some tobacco and apply it to the sore to keep off the flies.
If a person says, “I am trembling,” that comes from an evil spirit.
hold within the hand
spear
start
entire hand
black rice
fingerprint
squeeze
knead
ball up
drawn-up limb
when?
no
no longer
don’t
will not
compulsive
incomplete
ignore
shrink
retract
thick
dense
withered
wilt
move
restless
embrace
restrain
adhere
quiver
small bag
basket
pinworm
signal
tremble
intense pain
knotted rattan
wrinkle
pleat
strength
stiff
sore
chew
solidify
thicken
stretch out
straighten
break
pulsate
throb
lump
protrude
you
we
red bird
you
close
shriveled
no
I
Jew’s harp
horse
pick out
scrape out,
bamboo water
We wrinkle our eyebrows when we have just awakened.
When we catch large fish, we roast some until partially cooked so that it will become stiff and not be wasted.
The material that was starched became stiff when it dried.
When the twin-engine airplane flies, its wheels retract.
When a person becomes old, they become shriveled because they become bent over and feeble.
If there is a black ant in the food being cooked, we will pick it out with a spoon.
If we get a thorn in our foot, we will pick it out with a needle so that it will be removed.
If there are a lot of dirty spider webs, we brush them off with a broom so that they will be removed.
We scrape out the seeds of the ripe papaya.
Lift up both of your hands so that you can be rescued from drowning.
We were surprised at Amutatoy.
We were surprised at Amutatoy.
I gave the pencil to Asat.
Dogs, when they are itching, they scratch with their feet.
A person nervously moves his foot but he is not itching; he is just moving it for no particular reason.
A tire becomes smaller if it has a hole because the air will be expelled.
When we dry corn in the sun, it will shrink because it is green.
We get smaller when we get skinny.
If it is round but has become smaller, it has shrunk.
We eat salad raw.
The lastborn is the final offspring; she will not bear children again.
Slice
Lift up
Lift up one hand
Lift up both hands
Tree
Fetch wood
Harvesting tool with a sharp curved blade
We
Mosquito net
Fear of heights
Creek
thunderheads
Fine bits of metal
Jerk
Squeak
Sew
A hem
Blinded
Lightning
edge
On side of
Motion of an animal's foot when it scratches
Nervously move one's foot
Continually scratch as a dog with mange
shrink
Eat raw
Eyebrow
Crippled
Hair barrette
Lastborn child
lie curled up
twisted vines
enclose
caged
caged
cheer
curl
curl
beautician
perm
floating ribs
crab
love song
clothing
black beetle
please
they say
fear
fear
today
now
recently
doe
whatchamacallit
thing
get
receive something
hospitable
treat well
excuse me
inadvertently offend someone
become flavorless
faded in color
hen gathering her chicks under her wings
clay cooking pot
flower pot
call a chicken with "kuru-kuru"
spine
for the spine to protrude
walk hunched over
sneak up on someone in a stooping position
be curled up in the womb
The python was curled up as it was lying in wait on the path of a pig.
When we give a warning signal, we pay attention to whether there are people; those are the ones suspected to be raiders stepping on sticks. We say, "rrrrr".
A person who is afflicted with a fear of people is terrified and must travel to wherever he might go.
When we fillet fish, we remove the bones.
If we meet someone along the trail and their child is crying and we help comfort him, that is an example of treating a child well.
When we finish off the last bits of food from a pot, we scrape the crust of the rice from the pot.
A mother hen, when it is afternoon, gathers her offspring under her wings.
A person calls his chicken, whom he will feed corn, by saying, "Kuru-kurù."
female monkey
organs
stink bug
rub hands
flap wings or flutter
scratch with claws
dig with claws or hands
scratct
dove’s call, believed to predict future events
old house
head louse
embers of fire
black tick
speckled tick
alternate legs
fan
offering
burn hotter
When its feet are bound, a chicken will flap its wings or flutter so that it can get loose.
The dog is digging because he is relentlessly pursuing a rat there in a hole in the ground.
As for a person who is stepping down to the ground from his house, if he hears the call of a dove at the same time, he/she will not go ahead with climbing down.
If we are burning a field and the wind is strong, there will be a lot of embers that leap up and over to another mountain, which will also catch fire.
When people’s children are sick, they quickly get a chicken for the shaman to perform a wave offering.
You come on Monday.
You leave my things alone.
If we experience swelling that has not yet burst, our lymph nodes in the groin will hurt.
If an omen dove calls from both our left and right simultaneously, we must stay home. That is the labak omen.
A mother hen, when it is afternoon, gathers her offspring under her wings.
[It's necessary] that [the girls] don't disobey what you have told them.
I have just now newly eaten supper.
If someone visits from Kapalong, they meet us at the junction so that they can find our house and won’t repeatedly get lost.
Monday
lost
bamboo
groin
different
leave alone
launder
laundry
warning of death by two simultaneous dove calls
very
small dark lizard
roast in fire
weave
slim
slim
wild boar
scratchy
scratched
low note
business
interfere
sexual relations
exceed
excel
disobey
middle finger
supper
eat supper
tasteless
tasteless
lose
lost
A person who has caught a pig delivers a forkful to each house.
If a person is shopping in a big store, he is distracted from making a purchase because of seeing so many things.
Pick up the pangi seeds because we will soak out the poisonous sap.
The person who speaks forthrightly, his speech is straight. He does not speak in a roundabout way.
When we strike a flint stone, sparks fly out.
The lagtang vine, its fruit is used to poison the banak fish.
visit house
deliver
pebbly
rough
confused
seeds of pangi fruit
wide-eyed
see clearly
watch closely
very
especially
evening
fish
sigh
logging
lumber
black
include
hold or carry multiple items
carry in arms
belongings
private parts
beeswax
crispy
animal voice
bamboo sound
weed
sap
travel directly
speak clearly
fly out
splatter
supernatural knowledge
vine
lagtang vine
The plucking sound, that is the sound of the jew’s harp, kuglung or zither instruments.
A person who has caught a pig delivers a forkful to each house.
When we strike a flint stone, sparks fly out.
A person who becomes alienated from his companion becomes an enemy.
When we are intensely thirsty, we need to drink some water.
A mother hen, when it is afternoon, gathers her offspring under her wings.
sound of instrument
high note
writhe
struggle to wrench free
larynx
trash
hodgepodge mixture
run
place for racing
set dogs on trail
yellow bead
yellow
swift
fast
full moon
filled out
welt
break out in welts
scratch due to itching
fan oneself
intensely thirsty
small animal
black rice
fussy caterpillar
infection
soup
red hues
join together
bring together
converse
mud
bring people together
leave a remnant
become alienated
abstain from work
friendship name
give friendship name
give friendship gift
morally bad
naughty
prostitute
The people who short-cut from Tagasan travel up the mountain, traverse the summit, and descend as they go downhill to Maambago.
An airplane that departs from Japan to America ascends, flies over the earth, and then descends.
yard
serve food during mourning
meet on the way
arrange to meet
village on the Liboganon River
sea serpent or eel
cross ankles
choke
blackened spear
fancy knife
fat
develop well
bumpy
fetish to stop rain
slingshot
fat
sticky
soft
mix
bottle
large biting black ant
stunted
large camote
scrub floor
guess
baby blanket
wade
hit
beat or whip
travel up and over
fly up and over
bold
propose marriage
accomplish
young featherless chicken
give as a free gift
favored child
beloved
edible red larvae
white rice
edible grub
sky
large bamboo container
large carrying basket
camote roots
lie on stomach
lay on stomach
topple on stomach or face
broad jump
run swiftly
long bamboo
make a circle or hoop
face
be crazy
blood
bleed
apply blood
throw tantrum
fly (insect)
brush flies away
millipede
be deprived
be depressed
The larva of the palasan rattan forms a cocoon by enveloping itself in what it has chewed up, and only then does it change into a beetle.
As for the broad jump, when we run, we will jump over an obstacle if there is one.
If we measure the jump, we will see who can jump the highest when we leap from a running start.
A hoop is made of rattan that is wound in and out into a circle, which is then rolled with a toss and caught with a thrust of a stick as the children play.
When the boil bursts, the pus will be mixed with blood.
The chicken is made to bleed on the altar.
You watch over the dead, your emotional pain accompanies you, you weep and sit in silence. That is when a person does not talk.
dare
smooth
sleek
rebuild
miscarry
travel across slope
tree
fish
cry
associate
lie lined up
flood
sand
wither
lake
odor
burning smell
heat water
clearing
clear way
shallow water hole
distance
search
do accurately
nose flute
abaca fiber
cross
lose offspring
misfortune
slide kernels
kernels
undeveloped
fetus
wasp
As for a love charm, we use it on a girl if we don't have the courage to ask if she is interested.
When the river floods, it rains for one night and then the entire riverbed is underwater.
If the corn flowers wilt, it is a sign that the corn is being blighted.
This is a lake that has no outlet for the water.
If we cross to the opposite side of the river, we will be carried away by the current if the water is swift.
The sun gives brilliance to the light.
When something gleams like gold, its glint is beautiful.
The airplane is able to fly because it has been repaired.
As for flour, if we shake the sack of flour, it will become dust because it becomes airborne.
I will remove the horse from the village so that it can choose what it will eat. We remove the horse from the village.
short trees
field left idle
small rice bird
throw flat
perch
perch
jumper suit
pour melted fat
body
large tree
start field
planting time
go down creek
break through
have connections
cross river
rooster
weeds
earthworm
spider
spider web
solitary tree
go downriver
slide downhill
wilt leaves
light
glint
shine
light up
fly
carried by wind
long
height
go away temporarily
release horse
always
play
playful
toy
unfocused
wavy
The voice of that girl is beautiful; her tone is good.
The groom heeds the custom/warning; he returns to his mother [following the marriage ceremony].
When there are many people, we have to squeeze in and out to get by.
The visitors came and found us absent from the house.
A person who doesn’t fight back will be called cowardly by a person who is fierce: “You are actually a coward.”
When we look at the date of a month, we need to reserve a time when nothing conflicts so that the gathering together will happen.
neck
throat
beads
tone
glottalized singing
heed order
heed warning
weave in and out
squeeze past
long seed bead
find absent people
desire
large cicada
woven basket
cowardly person
terrified person
converse
wonder
roll eyes
tobacco
wrap around
wind something
monkey trap
return
come back repeatedly
thousand
many people
go outside
outside
gather together
gathering place
round piece
go around
encircle
move circularly
deceptive
go around outside
narrow
tight
pass by
refuse to give
strong
give birth same day
play at work
wild mushroom
cloudy weather
pointed
tire
run over
squeeze out
continuous crying
insulting address
originate
conjunctivitis
always noisy
turn
go in circles
float
distinct speech
red sugarcane
fasten
clip
pinch
dirty
become dirty
rice growth stage
ascend
outlet
flow out
small pool
snap in two
winnowing tray
pace back and forth
search around
That person plays at his weeding; he doesn't stick with the task.
As for a side stream of a river, there is an outlet downstream.
If it is soft and flexible, it will not crack.
The water has puddled.
sandpaper
bad luck
charm
pangi fruit
break pot
swim on back
decorated metal
return
roll
rolling motion
go down
prevent rats
give outright
climb down
ridgepole
other side
remove water
leech
eye leech
file
five
citrus fruit
ticklish
squeamish
willies
finger ring
sacrifice chickens
dam water
grow fast
enclose
be dammed up
chicken fight
stomachache
marry sibling
It’s bad luck to have a dog that won’t hunt.
The pogul wood will break the frying pan.
He had to turn around and go back.
It is lifted by leverage so that it will roll.
A house, if it only has glass windows, they are transparent because we can see through to the other side because our view is unobstructed.
The creeks which have become shallow pools, we remove the water until it dries up and then we can catch the fish and other edible water creatures.
The child grows fast.
There is water that is dammed up in the canal; it cannot pass.
mistake someone
cuddly
fondle baby
affected by evil spirit
gather
stack up
dove
affected by dove call
sugarcane
edible tree fruit
camote leaves
see kois (nudge)
perspiration
perspire
see salilung (shade)
harmonica
black cloth
meander
look back
look back and forth
get attention
tiny bell
leap
shake grain
complete group
chaff
forget
ignore
stay in one house
encircle
be surrounded
preserve meat
tree bark
abaca trousers
Their fingernails were sweating.
I’ll let the camotes leaf out.
He just [purposely] forgets it; he doesn't pay attention to it.
If there is a person who has a fault/sin whom we are arresting, we say, “Don't resist because you have no recourse because you are surrounded.”
When we get the bark of the langilan tree to wall a house, we pound its outer layer (lit. skin) so that it will come loose.
peaceful
slanted
flirt while married
clean
dredge river
tree wood
set (sun)
calm water
deep pool
leech
tiny
sugarcane field
haunted
give attention
toothless
cut wedges
detour
miss
killed person
close eyelids
released
mountain summit
shallow bowls
walk around
The sun will set.
That family is at peace; there is nothing to worry them.
But if that place is abandoned, it will be quiet; there are no more people and no talking that we can hear.
The evil spirit haunts.
So the evil spirits won’t haunt us.
When something haunts us, we hear many things: moaning, a child crying, or a cat or dog dragging a chain.
The person does not pay attention to his own purpose.
Cut out the knot.
But when he saw the person who was wounded, he detoured. He passed by on the other side of the path.
winnowing tray
raid
raider
born raider
try to obtain animals
beat rhythm
uproot camotes
calf of leg
baby louse
core of wood
rope trap
take long steps
goose pimples
banana
right
meaning
express meaning
explain
tune instrument
become clear
meaning clear
go free
surround
difficult childbirth
go in and out
overtake
straight stick
go down to sea
opportunity
exchange
set up trap
half
midnight
dawn
earthworm
leave home
twisted meaning
We beat with one drumstick on a [hanging] gong, and we beat a rhythm on a drum.
If there is a person who has a fault/sin whom we are arresting, we say, “Don't resist because you have no recourse because you are surrounded.”
When we look at the date of a month, we need to reserve a time when nothing conflicts so that the gathering together will happen.
Banlak went down to the sea.
We touch the water with our finger [to see] whether the warmth is just right.
uncooked
different
cook in bamboo
wander around
run errand
hollow out tree
white bead
continue without stopping
check on something
indented line
swell up
succeed
loose basket
remove clothes
make sluggish
cut tree to fall
make murky
bury in soil
root of tree
corner area
husked rice
sarong
flame
each
When the mother of a child goes off to weed [her field], she leaves her child in the care of someone else and that person watches over him/her.
If something heavy is put on the raft, it will be weighted down and then it will sink.
When a person dies, [he/she] is buried in the ground.
When I fuel [a fire] with wood and the fire becomes hot (it is alive), it is flaming.
I won’t give to you because there isn’t enough for one each.
eat well
selfish person
difficult
burdensome
manage or lift
solve problem
exert strength
rushing water
plant tobacco
expends effort
poison
cause bad luck
lymph nodes
lymph nodes
crumble, mash
punishment
correct
disembark
cut by slashing
harvest rice
seashell
shout
tree bark
leave
pry off
pollywog
strangle
door
damming creek
move out of way
pull, release
come loose
carried by two people
breakfast
That woman was selfish and did not give her neighbor any rice.
It is burdensome to travel. We don't feel like traveling (lit. feel lazy/weary to travel). We won't follow through if we feel weary.
I can't carry that heavy burden. (or "I cannot solve that difficult problem.")
If it takes a long time for you to give birth, someone will say, “Goodness, you are having a hard time [delivering a baby].”
If we cross swift water, we have to step firmly when crossing because we will be pushed over as it is foaming.
The child who always cries until daybreak is called a child who predicts bad luck.
If we experience swelling that has not yet burst, our lymph nodes here in our groin will hurt.
She involuntarily cried out because the throbbing pain hurt excessively as her body was smashed.
The rain chastened us.
When bees swarm, they just stay in their hive for a week and then leave the hive as they transfer.
If he let it go, he intended to release the dog.
drown
rumbling sound
pale
desert
look around
step over
flatten board
uprooted tree
mushroom
be hidden
wrap rice
enter
break out
protrude
small camote
dislocated hip
old basket
fall through hole
small crab
poisonous snake
make holes
mortar
come out
be born
burst forth
fragment
There is something that breaks out [on the body] which itches.
Two days ago she fell through.
Uncle made a mortar which was small but the mouth [of the mortar] was spacious and deep.
kindling wood
flame up
sluggish
climb branches
fly away
hop with both feet
drawstring
wicked child
preserve meat
lie on back
string fish or beads
wide
width
widen
beg insistently
give in to begging
wash hands
filth
cursed
stand ears of corn
remove clothing
coconut ladle
wave of sea
inside boat
shed skin
explain
wean
stain
sooty
rope
twist strands
tender
hair
wear hair long
To use a fallen tree as a bridge to cross over a stream.
If you let the bird go, it will fly away.
If you tie a chicken and it struggles, it will hop away.
A bird hops when it steps with both feet as it moves around.
Estimate the width.
Children, don’t peek at the one giving birth because you will get cataracts if you look at the afterbirth, and you will be cursed. When you grow up, you won’t be able to see.
If it is a chicken, when the mother abandons its chicks because it follows a rooster, the chicks will be weaned.
shake, as a tree or house, caused by a person or supernatural force (not an earthquake)
wallow in mud
bird blind
rotted
skin abrasion
lose something
gruel
fuss
gouge out hole
burrow
fetish
tamp eel burrow
eel trap
rattan
take floor apart
black chicken
blue or green
slow, durable
stab oneself
torrential rain
skin animal
fall apart
apply liquid to hair
thunder
kneel
As for the person, he felt his house shake when he slashed the python.
The fence is rotten.
The burrows of the marmots mound are connected underneath to the places where they make their nests.
People make holes on purpose, as outhouses or for garbage.
We’ll break the floor.
Watch the child if you have him stand because he will plop down.
We plop down as a child who is just learning to walk or an adult who is weak or dizzy.
If one trembles, he shivers because he has been entered by his familiar spirit.
If we are teaching a child, he is quick to understand.
The person with good character: He isn’t a liar, he doesn’t gossip/start scandals, he is afraid to do bad things, he humbles himself.
peel camotes
skin or outer layer
not sticky rice
plop down
dark
return same night
male
male companion
male animal
male partner
peel off layers
tremble
rice container
roll up flat
large python
rooster
earthworm
poisonous snake
nipa palm
camote leaves
swim doggy paddle
hair
large ant
tree vine
sit on bare floor
green taro
algae or moss
develop moss
hole
good character
teachable
large shell horn
shake (earthquake)
married couple
light pink
coffin
lie beside
landslide
sticky fruit
soft flexible
set apart
village
faint or nap
cornsilk
shiny smooth
pronged arrow
tears
watering eyes
wooden stakes
blister
rough leaf tree
fold up
chips
deceive to kill
hummingbird
reciprocate brideprice
request repayment brideprice
field unharvested
If there is a landslide (lit. ground which landslides), the trees become uprooted and fall.
If it is soft and flexible, it will not crack.
I’ll lie apart from the others.
The leaves of the lupit tree are used like sandpaper to smooth objects such as handles, sheaths, and other wooden or bamboo items.
The leaders are having a discussion about whether there will be requests for reimbursement of a brideprice.
rub off
fall out
slip inadvertently
slippery
slide deliberately
night
slip down
hole
force way in
knee-chest position
feast; headache; chills
have war
weak
cheesy substance
cooked
kneel
uprooted tree
haul downriver
ginger
follow closely
large roots
The sesame [stems] are turned upside down to let the seeds drop out because the seeds have burst open.
When the sun goes down, it begins to become dark.
When the pig has been cooked, they strip the bones which still have flesh on them.
We will haul it downriver.
supreme God or gods
river north of Mansalinow
village at river junction
American
town of Kapalong
village on Liboganon river
beautiful; good attitude
creek name
harmonious relationship
relaxed brow
brother of girl; male cousin
become familiar; find out
be acquainted
happy; peaceful
feel peaceful; clear conscience
thousand
prolific plant; strong current
fiery temper; brave
try to arouse unconscious person
If a person has a concern and then his breath is helped, his brow relaxes.
When the airplane lands in Maambago, many people come to find out what guests have arrived.
As for that [word] anxious, one feels especially not peaceful.
When the older people add up money, they go from a hundred to a thousand pesos.
A person in the mountains calls water which is swift, mabonbon (“strong”).
A person who is ill and can no longer be aroused is going into a coma.
buoyant
lukewarm water
hail
thick
substitute person
visitor
guarantee
wild boar
worrying
play (animal)
expensive
motor
generator
sewing machine
typewriter
emotionally strong
thick
small ant
kind of wood
soft
peaceful feeling
smooth breath
They romp with their owners.
A mother dog, it plays with its puppy.
If there is a person who has experienced the death [of a loved one], we offer emotional comfort that we should strengthen ourselves against the emotional pain.
When we press it with our feet, it runs.
kind of tree
long life; patient
short and squat
spleen; term to woman
upset
true; verify; guarantee
peaceful feeling
feel girl’s breast
banana or sugarcane
term to unmarried man
large poisonous snake
multicolored poisonous snake
chew betel nut; betel container
black shrimp
kind of fish
raider; go on raid
material; cloth
forest bird with red crest
later; turn out differently
unripe; immature
indeed
He will be slow to die. He has been given a long life. (lit. The placing of his breath is long.)
A person who does not pay attention to their own attitudes but then does not realize their own emotions.
If someone is stabbed by a raider, the spear will pierce and go through [the body].
If someone borrows five thousand pesos and promises to pay after harvesting corn, but later on, he does not pay.
We harvest young corn because we will boil it since it is good to eat.
The person with good character: He isn’t a liar, doesn’t gossip, is afraid to do bad things, and humbles himself.
repetitive action
small orange flower balls
kind of bird
bird of prey
blowfly
peanuts
older person; leader
leaf chewed with betel nut
example; signify
why
thin
position of sun
healthy; strong
brand new material
white material
shortening
bobbed hair
chicken
bird
bright moonlight
white
dry
quick-burning
angry or bitter
ugly
There was a saw which was borrowed by a person. After he used it, he caused it to be borrowed again by another person.
The birds of prey, that is the name of the birds which prey, swooping up chicks, snakes, and water creatures.
What’s the matter with you?
Why don’t they dig camotes?
The meaning of the sun being mid-way (lit. ear position), is that the sun is as high as one’s ear as it shines.
The other places which have been reached by the sun have nothing to eat because their ground is dry.
Uncle was thirsty (lit. dry) after walking far. He said, “I would like to drink [something] please if maybe you have some water, Usì.”
Wood that is quick-burning always flames and then quickly burns up when used to build a fire.
Let's build a beautiful house.
I'm doing you a favor.
One's gallbladder is good if there is nothing to upset [him/her].
I feel upset. (lit. My breath hurts.)
A person who gets up without awaking is sleepwalking.
Every day.
When a person dies, they are buried in the ground.
The chickens have perched already.
If it is pounded, a can will become crushed.
good
happy
feel upset; hurt; sad; angry
eye
sun (poetic)
every; until
die; kill
wealthy
plural particle; and; approximately
squash or crush
gooey; sticky
brilliant red bird
doorsill; good
ancestor; forefather
kind of red rice; woven mat
cat
kind of rice
tiny pollywog
examine closely
rotten; mushy; decomposed
eat with fingers
tiny lizard
how; what; in what manner
emotionally fragile
however; still; whenever
fragrant tree roots
mutter; grumble
sore; red eyes
expression of shame
A wild cat naturally lives in the forest.
The cats who live in the house are smaller.
If there is a person whom he has met, he will examine his face closely to see if that is really him.
Masticate it well so that it will disintegrate; continually chew it so that you can swallow it.
What shall we do now?
If our breath is soft, we will cry when we see someone who has been wounded because we pity/have compassion on them.
Whenever he goes downriver, he does not stop en route until he returns home coming from Patil.
Shame on you who leave your companions behind.
A flower which is closed has not yet opened.
The gums of a person, that is where the teeth are attached (lit. sprout).
As for camote plants, when we plant them, the roots follow the stem (lit. body).
The owner of the camote field said, “I'm fencing these camotes of mine.”
grumble; complain
many (wriggling mass)
closed (flower)
disarranged
murdered; death after warning
kind of fish
in contrast to
female young animal
gums (person)
camote
camote field
mustard
couple with no children
nasal mucus; runny nose
mutter to oneself
soot from hearth
We press and rub the sharpening stone against the bolo, axe, or knife in order to sharpen its edge.
The word ngadngad means “press and rub against,” which happens when a bolo is pressed against a sharpening stone.
The ambung is what the fisherman puts his catch of fish in.
When the throbbing is excessive, we involuntarily cry out from the pain.
If someone scrapes bamboo with a large knife (bolo), the sound very much sets our teeth on edge.
All people, we each have a name.
If a person forces someone down, he will press and rub their head against the ground.
If a woman smells something burning, her affection for that man will disappear.
A person whose mouth is wide open as he laughs because he is very amused continually happens to grin.
press and rub
fish
opening
cry out
squeal
name
smell
scrape
children’s game
alert
sour
dribble saliva
tooth
grin
laugh
raise eyebrows
whimper
cicada
rude girl
stubborn person
nose mucus
what
When it was suppertime already, he happened to think about his family and [wondered] what they might have to eat this afternoon.
If someone visits [our house], we ask them, “So what is your purpose [in visiting]?
OK go ahead
Really
Even if it is not our relative (lit. companion) who has died, if we participate in weeping [with the others], someone else will comfort us by saying, “It is really quite natural that we die.”
so
I said, “So how many hundred [pesos] is your horse?”
so then really
So then really she is also my daughter-in-law
so...after all
So you have guests after all?
Indeed
This is indeed a python.
The only thing that is left
She wasn't paying attention to eating. Water was the only thing left [that] she was drinking.
All that is left
just enough left
that is what remains
We don't have [enough] rice to lend because we have just enough left for one meal.
likely
About the radio, if we set it on the floor, if there are children who play, it is likely that it will be stepped or become destroyed.
The reason for whispering.
The reason Utù is whispering to to his friend is so that his mother and father will not know that he will accompany his friend to go to Manila.
We rebuke them with, “What are you whispering about? Go to sleep now because it is already late at night.”
To whisper.
To whisper to each other.
A person, if he has something to tell his companion, he will just whisper what he is saying into the ear of his companion whatever it is they are hiding and just [the] two of them know about their agreement.
You, don't whisper so loudly because there are those who are sleeping.
To make a whispery
When there are many [grubs] which are making whispery  and gurgling [sounds], then we split knotched pula palm log and we see many grubs which are squirming.
suppose
To think
You supposed the rice was all gone, but there’s still some.
To assume
Sister-in-law assumes that you will have your son go with us.
To regard something or someone in some way
I have been claimed by that person; he regards me as his younger brother
pretend
The children are pretending that what they are riding are horses.
To be sprawled out on the ground (lifeless or unconscious)
There was a person who had been murdered who se body was found sprawled out on the ground as he was lying there dead.
nara tree
Crowd.
Jackfruit
A message
Someone gave me a letter. That person whom I knew said, “I'm sending a message please that I will travel upriver to Maambago.”
When he gave the letter [to me], he instructed (lit. caused) [me] to add to it by word of mouth to insure that [the person] would set aside some corn [for him].
To tell
say
speak
But there are those who keep coming back with their request who cannot express what they [want to] say.
[Speak] louder when you speak so that the others can hear
Lita told Mery that she would sleep at her [place].
No matter what I say, [my mother] won't agree to stay with her other offspring.
They weren't able to tell me another word [for the word aguanta “endure”.]
You will be told when [the grains] have filled out.
Repeatedly
randfather Amasig was the one who was repeatedly telling me that we will be alert because raiders would come.
To plan
guarantee
If there is a horse which I will reserve, I will give a pig as a downpayment (lit. that which I [give] ahead of time). That is my guarantee that I have reserved it.
Flavor
The flavor is the same because it is astringent.
The flavor is different.
To taste
To discern flavor.
To become flavorful
When we taste it and we can discern that the flavor of the broth of the pig is just right , it has become flavorful.
camote
Slow.
But the [motorboat] motor which I had brought was slow because it only had five horsepower.
take a long time.
It takes us a long time to arrive because we have to detour .
To be slow to do something
The Manobos who went to Manila were slow to return to Davao.
Be slow to carry out an activity or fulfill a request.
As for the mother who orders her child to fetch fire and then the child just stands there for a long time, the mother will say, “For goodness sake this child is being slow when we are in a hurry to cook and there is no fire!
The person who is purchasing an axe, he will be slow in looking because the one that is best , [that is the one] he will buy.
Something taking a long time
That which took them so long to return was because they did not have any fare with which to return home.
Slowness
The reason for our slowness to purchase the axe is because we will examine it like to see if it has a crack.
Be slow to carry out an activity or fulfill a request
The person who is purchasing an axe, he will be slow in looking because the one that is best , [that is the one] he will buy.
Wait a minute
Wait a minute because I will put my shoes on next.
Dilidaly
To do something slowly
Regarding a house which needs to be raised, it is jacked up slowly because it is necessary to block the space [made from the lift].
Very slowly
Slower
Pus
When the boil bursts, the pus will be mixed with blood.
To be angry, fed up
Flat land
As for the Liboganon river, the reed there are thick in the flat area and its body is hard.
Land that is mostly flat but has some hills like the Nauli area
Sloping
The mountain is sloping.
contrary to what one might expect
surprisingly
anyway
in spite of
The watching of the older monkeys is turned around because surprisingly it is their offspring, [the] baby monkey, which is the one to watch out for them.
The person who doesn’t pay his debt, he contrary to [our] expectation, he lies to us saying that he will pay.
Even though we warned [that person] not to go to his field to fetch something for them to eat because there was a strong warning, he went anyway and was hit by the raiders. He was shot.
offspring of a large animal
The horse, when it gave birth, a colt was born.
He gave me the calf of the carabao.
Small girl
A rat
part of
Moddina’s husband.
by
Andi and her companion will blame me.
part
What relation to Lugtom is Sanglit?
prep by
Ogmad has washed them already.
to be afraid
Of you
by you
yours
Thin
Whether it is high or short, thick or thin, if it is in the yard and surrounds a house, it is called a fense.
show-through
A skirt of  thin material, is show-through when we look at it.
very thin
As for aluminum roofing which is very thin, it easily becomes dented when we step on it as we are using it to make a roof.
Narrow
skinny
Skinny hips!
thin
With respect to sayote vegetable in the refrigerator, if it becomes thin and has shrunk, it is said to be shriveled.
When the sky is clear, the clouds are just thin and the rays of the sun [shine] through.
coconut
and then see
part of
That’s not a lie.
Just one more supa.
Where did they go?
What
whose
which
that
Whose house?
His house.
They weren’t our companions who came here to our place.
To taste
To savor
Whatever kind of viand we stew, we salt it and then we take a sample and taste the broth [to see] if the flavor is right.
To rebuke
To teach
to behave
Rebuke her because she’s always visiting
She wasn’t rebuked.
To be strong
To be healthy
He will not be strong unless he is playing.
alive.
Regarding if we had a friend with whom we had a good relationship but if [someone sings] his song but he is no longer on earth, you will be caused to think about him when you hear that song [which he used to sing] when he was still alive.
heartily
vigorously
Eat heartily so that you will soon become well from your illness.
Be strong
excert effort
Exert effort to pull back the saw so that you will learn how to saw.
boost one's strength.
No matter what I do to boost [my] strength, I just continue to feel weak.
In the past
before
some time ago
It got wet some time ago.
When we were still children in the past, playing was the only thing we knew about.
What?
What did you get?
What is she paying you?
what then
Hmm, so what then should we use for medicine?
Fine
You
your
yours
You offer it to me.
your house.
We
us
We didn’t know.
our
our chicken
part
you
your
Your other younger sibling.
Do you like being alone?
You choose yours.
To sleep soundly
If our sleep is good, we will sleep soundly and it will be a long time before we get up.
The person who sleeps soundly, will be slow to awaken in the morning.
To be lulled.
The chicken will go into a state of withdrawal when it becaomes lulled.
To keep for oneself
I would not want someone else to take any [rambatan fruits]. The meaning of that is to keep for oneself.
To refrain from giving
I have a heavy shirt. If someone asks for it I won't give it because I refrain from giving it because it was very expensive for me to buy.
I have a horse and someone wants to buy it , but if I don't give it because I keep my horse back ?? from selling it.
protect
The person who has harvested rice, he will cover it with leaves so that it will not be rained on.  He is protecting it so that the rice will not sprout.
monkey
Monkey do you have large thighs?
Smoke
That namu torch, it is what is used to release ??  the smoke so that the bees will be smoked and leave.
smoky
The fire is smoky
dust
Abug is airborn dust from the ground.
exposed to smoke
There is a [kind of] wood which is called gisois which is ignited there by the rice so that it will be smoked.
If you build a fire and blow on it, you will get smoke in your eyes and they start smarting.
make smoke
The smoking torch, that is what is used to make smoke to drive out the bees.
to humble one's self
As for the person of good character, [he]  isn't a liar, he doesn't [start] scandals. He is afraid to do bad things. He humbles himself. If he is scolded, he doesn't let it bother him; he just [purposely] forgets it; he doesn't pay attention to it.
extinguish
The how that has caught fire, it's necessary
obliterate
The rain will obliterate the footprints.
Murky
The water is murky.
grey
The shirt is grey
To cut open an animal's body
To be operated on
The person who slaughters a pig by cutting its throat, he cuts open the stomach because he will remove its intestines.
The woman who is having difficulty as she gives birth, her stomach will be opened up so the child can be caused to be taken out.
At that [time] when I returned from Davao when my head had been operated on, we planted rice.
When I took my daughter down river, it wasn't until six o'clock in the morning when she was operated on.
Opps
harvest
croon or chant words in falsetto while playing the kobbiung.
faint
pass out
to die
get fed up
to run out of patience with someone
Quit talking because I will get fed up with you and I will happen to react in an undesirable manner against you.
We recovered from our fear of the raiders.
To stare
The eye becomes long; [you are] staring.
brothers-in-law
forgive
Please forgive.
hold tightly
scold
If he is scolded, he won't let it bother him.
She will scold [all] of her companions since they won't obey [her].
There are some who scold only with their mouth(s). There are those who strike when they get after [someone].
quarrel
Fish
meat
Homosexual activity whether all women or all men.
The man who engages in a honosexual relationship (lit. sleeps together with the same [sex]) does wrong (lit. bad). They behave like their [male] companion is a woman.
To be reconciled to one another
When everyone feels hurt, that is [the context where] they will be reconciled to one another. You hugged each other because you were reconciled
o make a gurgling or rumbling sound
Come here because I will listen to your stomach if your stomach growls. Maybe you have worms.
When there are many [grubs] which are making whispery  and gurgling, rumbling [sounds], then we split knotched pula palm log and we see many grubs which are squirming.
miss
owl
Spasmotic coughing
We will build a fire and put those [red pepper] fruits in the fire and then we will hurriedly get out because we will inadvertently breathe in the stinging [smoke] and we will be afflicted by a cough in which we will frequently go into coughing spasms when we cough.
slow
item
piece
We tear off one piece of paper.
When we harvest a leaf of the alik-ik plant, [we get] just one piece.
Between
The fields are close to each other but there is a space between [them].
There is a child whose teeth are far apart. His teeth have spaces between them.
The second house, that is the one between the first and the third house.
A divider
If we live in a village, at each house there is a divider which is a fence which is the boundary.
go-between.
Put it between those
halfway point
Baguntaas is the halfway point between Valencia and Nasuli.
Rotten
smelly.
Whole group
The ones who say, andi-andì are those who are all girls who are playing.
to commit incest.
The one who commits incest is the one who marries someone who is closely related.
To soak in water.
It was just soaked briefly.
Soak
You will soak yourself in the water if your body is hot.
right fit
Perhaps this is your size
Possibly
Maybe it's a possible that I could borrow your horse because I will go to Patil because I will buy medicine.
It's not possible to borrow it because the horse's foot is sore.
Enough
adequate
This money is adequate for you to reach Davao.
The next year the [amount of] corn was enough that it could be sold.
to fit
From my first corn harvest, only thirty sacks fit in my granary.
suitable
There is a person who wants to buy a fish trap. He will ask, “Maybe it is OK with you (lit. suitable to your breath) if I trade a chicken for it?”
try
This week at the end?? of May, I would like to try to return to Maambago, but the fares to the vehicles have gone up.
That's why we will increase [the amount of] my money so that it will be enough to arrive at Maambago.
test
Don't test your mother because it's bad.
set on eggs.
A chicken which has laid eggs, sets [on its eggs] for fifteen days or sixteen days before  crack open.
obstruct
We were obstrcted by the soldiers.
to be obstructed
Today, I won't go to my field because we are being obstructed by the raiders.
The library was what blocked the water.
To suck
We just suck on candy so that it will be slow to dissolve.
To hold something in one's mouth
If we have a sore in our mouth, we will hold water in our mouth which contains salt.
Dumb
mute
The child who is mute, from the time he is born until he is old already he/sh is mute and will be unable to speak.
girl
Sweet
Candy is sweet because it has sugar
Delicious
If our cooking of viand is good, it is delicious because it is tasty because the meat/fish is tasty.
Fruit of the polì tree, small and round with leathery skin.
happen
Nothing will happen to us.
circumstance
What's going on with you?
To work hard
To be diligent
to stick to a job
the person who is making a house, he works hard to finish making it because he will move in.
He does his work diligently. He needs to work.
We need to do our work diligently like a slave. We [shouldn't] swerve from our work.
All of them are being diligent
A kind of edible frog.
A kind of cicada
flex
Scales
The creatures of the water like mud fish and the po-it fish, they have scales
part
dispose
throw away
leave behind
You are the ones who are mugtas who leave your companions behind
Abandon
We forget about our companions we simply abandon them.
If I have a guests, I will apologize that they will be left behind here at the house.
But if that place is abandoned, it will be quiet; there will be no more people and no talking that we can hear.
Estimate.
Estimate the length.
Please estimate [about how much we need] also for our breakfast. please.
I will borrow [some] of your money because I will go to Dugayan. Just estimate enough for my round trip from Dugayan
About right
There is this shirt which is probably about right for you.
Correct fit
Just my size.
Now
already
He’s accustomed now
It’s already used up
It’s lightning now.
quit
finish
stop
arise
sit up
The mother would say something like, “Get up because it is daytime.
move
[When the it inches forward], the baby moves a little.
to Address to the husband of one’s cousin; cousin-in-law.
chatter
baby talk
Monkeys always chatter.
Chatter to the baby.
play a tune
play
frustrated
As for the person who easily becomes frustrated, his thoughts are short and he quickly becomes agitated and angry.
hold breath.
As for people who swim underwater, [they] hold their breath as they swim underwater looking for fish.
out of breath
Some people are slow to get out of breath when he/she swims underwater and touches the bottom of a deep pool.
To pant from exertion, be out of breath.
Some people easily come down with a cough and then get out of breath so it is difficult [for them] to breathe.
smother
finish
If the speech is not finished, we don't know what a person is telling us.
When a cigarette is finished burning, its ashes will drop off.
The fire of the large trees keeps burning/smoldering. It will not be extinguished until the wood is consumed.
[At] the end(s) of a cluster of rice grain stems, it is there [the rice] begins to ripen.
When we pound rice, we strike it with the end of the pestle.
The  extention(s) of our body are the feet and hand(s) and the head.
The headdress of the of the love bird is red but the extention [of the headdress] there at the back of its neck is green.
underlyingly
He was amazed that [the child] was always crying, but in his underlying feeling, he was agitated and he was insulting the child.
extend
It has wide leaves which extend in a straight line from the body of that kapigsula tree.
To line up one after another
As for the expression amba-an, two or three people line up one after another to float on some object.
Swelling
blind boil
abcesses
There is a [type of] swelling which does not have a head [lit. eye]. That is a blind boil which gets very large and is a difficult kind of illness which people have.
If we often get [these kind of] swellings, we are very much afflicted with blind boils.
Strong improbability
It’s quite improbable that this centipede will poison anyone.
It’s improbable that he goes, for he isn’t successful.
Old rice
bubble
The water is bubbling.
plant grain
There in Maambago there were those who were caused to plant corn.
The custom about harvesting corn is, the ones who will harvest corn are the one(s) who planted.
get up
I'll get up enough energy [to go check on] my pig trap.
When we are ill, [we] just expend great effort to get up. That is [the meaning] of managing because we force ourselves to do something
If our blood is lacking we will be lightheaded when we walk and we won't be able to manage well to get around.
The person who is old cannot manage to walk well because his/her knees hurt.
If a person is hungry, he cannot manage to work
We help a weak person by holding [his/her] hand so that [he/she] will gain the ability to walk so that [he/she] will be able to become ambulatory.
recede
When the Liboganon River floods, the water is quick to recede.
The ocean swells and ebbs
The water is returning to its place
When the water recedes, there is still water; it returns to its original body [of water].
If there is no secondary channel, we recognize when the water is returning to its place because the beach becomes large as it is left behind by the water.
When the wind is strong, it's intensity will decrease
decrease in intensity
subside
encourage
We encourage the one singing love songs [by saying], “Continue singing love songs.”
winnow
When there is no more chaff, we cook it.
bird
sneeze
Sometimes we sneeze if we happen to smell something fragrant.
If we sneeze, it's possible that we are getting a cold.
decrease
The creeks which have become shallow pools, we remove the water until it dries up and then we can catch the fish [and other edible water creatures].
As for the creeks, they dry up when it is dry season.
When the [ruver] dries up, there is no more water because it has become dry.
secret.
secret
It was kept a secret from us.
die
die
person
human being
Who are [those] people who have just passed by?” They replied, “We have come from Kapugi no du-on tu-ud noy diò to Patil.”
image
idol
Where were you born?
As for people, they have eyes when they are born.
The po-it fish, the mudfish and the catfish are directly born in a live state when they give birth.
Birth
As for a child who is mute, he will be mute from [the time that] he is born until he has become old
age
We have a small child [whose] age is about one year.
manner of living
If we are careful about our conduct, our lives will be orderly.
resurrect
was brought back to life
eel
expel gas
exclamation of surprise.
so that
I smoked it (meat) so that it wouldn’t get wormy.
Speak louder so that the others can hear well.
so that even though
Let's return to Maambago so that even though I will die I will be at our house.
scrape
abrade
My camote has been scraped.
My skin has been abrazed.
Oh, this wall which I had painted has been scratched!
Name of a river and/or the village on this river which is just south of Maambago.
cause to happen.
They chew betelnut because they suppose it will make their teeth hard
The one who used it ran away, and he also threw it to another person.
do something.
do something
experience something
Foot
My feet did not touch the cement.
All domesticated animals have hips but chickens don't because their legs are attached to their sides.
leg
Kind of sugarcane.
obey
Submit
Fulfill
There is great value if we obey our father.
There are those who obey against their will, and there are those who willingly obey
To agree
No matter what I said, my mother would not agree to stay with her other daughter
Bread.
A grown pig.
burn snails
Just
for a while
next
first
Were they born just a month ago?
As for the people who dig comotes, they dumpt the comotes into the water because they will wash them first.
They are not arranged yet
Don’t do it yet.
You sleep first
I credited your horse first and then [as for] collecting,  you will ask about the payment for your horse.
I'm going to move to some other place for a while.
If [you] feel unsafe, leave together now for Maambao because it is a time to be alert for raiders for a while.
Just now
will take your horse ahead of time and then the next day you will just go to my house and inquire whether I have something to use for payment.
To drop off
After a long time, their flowers/petals drop off.
Even the leaves, they also drop off when they shed.
to slap
If there is [something] dirty on the winnowing tray, tap it on the bottom [so the dirt/debris will drop off].
Platform above the hearth used for drying wood.
To overwork someone.
Large
Cock’s comb.
lime
Make lime
The clam shells are gathered together to be processed into lime.
spread out one’s wings or arms.
Fungal disease of the skin
Be stubborn
tie bamboos together
Menstruate
attach firmly
There are pictures which we attach to the wall which is good to look at.
Stick
Stick the knife into the stump.
Give the dove some camote
Saul cast a knife/sword at David but it just happened to lbecome lodged in the wall.
To search for a pig
walk vigorously
A person who is walking, he/she continually walks vigorously.
The person who is vigorous, is strong in walking.
spine of a leaf
The spines of the cococut [leaf] are what are used to make a stick broom.
Veins, of a leaf
The cob of the corn, it is its stem on the inside [of the ear of corn].
handle
The handle of the pan is broken.
Possible
It is possible for the plane to fly because it has been repaired.
It’s not possible for the plane to come here because it’s broken.
Wing
Turkeys, geese, ducks, small geese, all have wings.
This little chick has sprouted wings.
skinny
clap one’s hands
deceive.
walk stooping
The person who is sneaking up on his enemy walks in a bent over position.
iguana
The iguana lives in the secondary forest.
Palm of hand
The person who has a had, has a palm
The palm, that is what has the lines
fish.
rattan
throw
There was someone who cast a knife at his companion but it just happened to lodge in the wall.
travel in direction of current
A person who travels with the current as he goes downriver by raft, he will be watching out so that the front part will not get rammed into a cliff so that it won't be capsized.
release
squash
deep wound
A injury which breaks the skin results from a person being wounded with an instrument which breaks the skin.
A person who is slashed, speared, shot with a gun, pierced [by a trap], or steps on sharpened bamboo stakes, all are wounded by that which breaks through the skin.
consider
shake back and forth
House of worship
Unhusked rice
hammer
The person who builds a house always pounds nail(s ) with a hammer.
heel
fill out
You will be told when [the grains] have filled out.
It's ripening is lacking; it’s not yet filled in.
pound
swim overhand.
To go through the motions of waving a chicken before sacrificing it.
Engagement feast
[When] there is someone who is getting married, the men ?? will have an engagement feast there at the place where he will be married in order to make an agreement as to when the wedding will be held.
Metal sheath
sunset
If the afternoon of a day is nice and the time is around five in the afternoon and the clouds are red, [there is] a sunset.
To go and inform another village of death.
search
If you won't take care [of the children], search for something to eat!
f we have forgotten [where] something is, we keep searching as we look for it until we are able to find it.
Shoulder
As for the shoulders, its extentions are the upper arms and the arms.
fill a basket
Let’s fill the basket with camotes.
plant camotes and rice
accuse or blame someone
Kidney.
People have kidney(s) in their body(s).
cluck
A chicken clucks when it flies down from having laid an egg.
blink the eyes and turn one's head
To go after and catch
If a dog sees something he will go after it and catch it.
If he didn't catch it, he didn't [successfully] go after and catch it.
To discuss marriage arrangements
To plant
Garden
To change one thing into something else
Boyboy started this magic because we didn’t like what we had to eat.
As for a person who is able to do a miracle, he has power to do something amazing.
The person who was blind whom Jesus treated and then he was able to see, it was like an amazing thing because Jesus did some miraculous.
To spit as of cat or dog; to hiss, sniff in disgust.
tsk
A kind of small tree
Chignon
A woman divided her hair into two parts as she was she was rolling her hair into [two] pompadours [on her head].
spokesperson or representative of a higher leader
You are my master/leader; you are my second leader.”
One person says, “You are his slave after all..” I will respond, “Yes indeed because I am his pangabaga “representative”
rescue
At the time that someone was drowned at the pool, there were many who were aware who were weren't able to go to the rescue.
It was very upsetting because she supposed that there wouldn't be anyone who could help her to make a rice granary. I was the one who was able to come to [her] rescue.
They will cause [the people] to be taken by surprise and then no one will be able to rescue them.
jealous
rinse mouth
Noisy
talkative
hunt with a dog
Binding on a bolo scabbard.
weapon.
steep place with overhanging vines.
get married
spear.
Upper leg joint
upper back
shoulder blade.
beg
plead
crack
large
screech.
Newly pregnant
call one’s dog
slap or knock
undone
untied
Bar handle
Comb handle
The side of the hip bone which protrudes
When a person becomes emaciated, the side of his hip bone protrudes
vow
Tattoo marks on the body
A kind of tree the leaves
Harvested but unthreshed rice stored in granary
alveolar click
yoohoo
Hate
clear one’s throat.
prepare
yell in triumph
shout in triumph
Man’s work for his mother-in-law before his marriage
call one’s dog from a distance
earn money
I'll work by the day for Aunt Domingga so that I can earn [some] money
receive money for work
The person who works in a field, he/she won't receive money for working until the corn has been harvested.
roam from house to house looking for food
arrange one’s skirt when squatting.
follow after someone because of being worried about their welfare.
white rice.
converse
crawl
When the child crawls, it also moves forward.
One’s female ward
call one’s dog
shout in triumph
Evening
Wail for the dead.
Lamet
stocks
Joint Pain
Kneel.
Pick one’s teeth.
camote.
Glutton
Exclaim
bask in the sun.
sit with legs extended
Sacrifice
Tiny switch of pig’s hair worn on tayun.
climb down
Climb up.
large bead.
tropical ulcer
ahead of time
If the baby in the abdomen has been properly positioned ahead of time, the mother will have it easier when she gives birth.
Our agreement in advance was that whoever has stamina to come along, he/she will be chosen.
in advance
We prepare ourselves ahead of time. It's as if we have had a intuitive warning.
shoot with bow and arrow.
suspicious
uneven
push hard
Small container
A small burrow going out from main burrow where an eel keeps its young.
Bamboo shelves of cupboard.
Name of a mountain near Mansalinao
Beach or rocky bottom of a river
Name of high mountain range that separates Tigwa from Langilan.
catfish
broken
broken
look out
project beyond a certain point.
If the spear projects , there’s a raider around.
Bag of waters
protest loudly.
visit one's home
If the measles illness reaches some place, if there is someone who visits from that place, the disease will be transmitted to us.
They don't have time to come for a visit because they have a lot of work.
sit cross-legged
curse
An [example of a] curse: “You will not have reached one month and you [will] have died.”
Why are you cursing  me?
plant seedlings of tobacco or papaya.
communicate with spirits
bow
The opening between the wall and the roof of a house.
Lipstick.
fish’s tail
The eel does not have a tail like a fish which is at the end of its body.
Dance
Dance the baby.
deliverately sway
We sway back and forth when walking.
extinguish
he lamps when we sleep, we extinguish them.
The lamps which just use kerosine, they are easily extinguished by wind.
As for an electric light, when its brightness is removed it goes out.
I’ll plant millet and corn the day the field is burnt.
finish a discussion.
forgive
If there is someone who has done wrong, if there is someone who requests mercy or forgiveness, it's not appropriate if his wrong-doing is ignored. If you forgive him, [the fault] isn't being ignored.
Christmas
hurry
rush
Hurry up.
banana
Light rain of short duration.
oversee.
comb design
A short, fat snake.
recognize because of being able to see someone clearly
We can’t recognize him if he’s far away.
domestic duck.
To slide and fall down at a distance.
Only one member of a pair of objects
Dawn
The day after.
Waning noon.
Dried salted fish
show something
It is certainly not a lie because you have shown it to me
Rice granary
Within hearing distance
A shelter will be built on the raft.
Leafy plant
Your face is like a payow.
bowl made of coconut shell.
bow and arrow set.
launder by pounding to remove dirt
get wet.
chick
cheep.
give freely
The tail of a fish
kobbiung tune.
keep close to
We will pass [close to] the edge of the cliff.
Mildewed corn
A kind of fish.
break open
Weevily rice.
touching each other
If our teeth are touching each other, it is difficult to remove the particles of food between the teeth.
There was a person whose toes we touching and connected. to each other.
How many
How often
How many days
How many days have I?
To spear
If someone is speared by a raider, the spear will pierce and go through [the body].
A cave in a mountain.
A baby monkey.
have a withered hand or foot.
Shake water from hands.
sprinkle water on someone or something.
slice or strip mat material.
grasshopper
shake food or water from one’s hand.
Fare
Eyelashes.
cover a heaping pot of camote
black sugar ant.
pat
Pat it [on the back??] so it will go to sleep.
rub something between the hands
Slant-eyed
lonesome
I’ll get lonely if they’re slow in returning.
cut off the ears of animal.
child or older person who is favored, sometimes due to being fairskinned.
storage shelter
Elena's mother said, inquiring of Manggoni, “Do you have a granary for your rice?”
I will make a storage shelter for corn.
A shelter will be built on the raft.
take a pinch of something
You take a pinch of salt.
To take a bit of salt, it is called one pinch.
A small, narrow chicken laying basket.
sit down.
Chair or place to sit
Seat
Long-sleeved
long-waisted
open-front
black and red Ata blouse
slingshot
trigger
trigger off
Pineapple.
Squint.
close one’s eyes
squashed
If we step on the ripe fruit of the papaya, it will be squashed.
Move over because I am getting squashed.
deliberately squash
They were being crushed because it was a narrow place.
vagina.
prison
slice in pieces
Slicer
Slices
put pressure
weight down
baby bird.
Peso
poke the eyes
If someone purposes to blind us, they poke out our eyes.
tear off
When we are slashing rattan and it hasn’t yet separated [from the vine] we continue cutting it until it has been  severed.
look
When the sun comes out when it is raining, the rain which we see shines.
A house if it only has glass windows, they are transparent because we can see through to the other side because our view is unobstructed.
sight
As for the sight of my eyes, I cannot see clearly.
show.
search for.
Seven
I will just be seven days downriver.
I will just be seven [days] downriver.
Physically undeveloped
A kind of small fish
There was someone who obtained a lot of small fish which she caught in her fish trap.
Bitter.
Bait
Fish traps are aited with camote
Camotes are used for bait
The small fishhook will be baited with an earthworm.
masticate
Masticate it well so that it will disintegrate; continually chew it so that you can swallow it.
If we chew well the [plant ]that is known to treat snake bite, when it has been masticated, we spit it on the [spot that] was bitten.
chew
He chews trash.
Lazy.
hoarse.
As for the person who is coughing, he can no longer speak out loud because he has become hoarse.
fasten
Take a minute to fasten [my buttons] because I can't manage to fasten my buttons.
lame, crippled in the legs
The person whos legs are crippled, he scoots along as he moves along
force
coerce
Our agreement was changed because he forced me to pay [an extra amount].
We are unable to coerce a child if he won’t obey.
She was coerced was forced into marriage.
There are those who obey against their will , and there are those who obey who are industrious.
She’s forcing us [to give in] to her begging.
pressure
If it is an adult who cries to go along [with someone], he will pressure the person [into letting him] come.
squeeze
Look squeeze on this papaya, maybe it is ripe.
That leaf is pounded and then the water is squeezed out.
A kind of tree
it doesn't burn if there is a field with many pogul trees.
lazy
As for the  lazy person, he does not want to work.  [As for] the person who is exceedingly lazy, we cannot order him [to do anything].
The person who doesn't have an appetite , will feel unambitious to work because he has no energy.
I won't go because I feel weary.
We are slow/procrastinate about ?? waing up because we don't feel like getting up.
He doesn't feel unambitious unless he has something he is ordered to do. He isn't strong unless he has something/someone to play with.
A dove’s call behind one
intentionally spread
smear
You-sing. smear some wet lime on the betelnut.
There is a person who has a snack of bread and he gets peanut [butter] which he spreads back and forth on it so that it will taste good
If we accidently smear soot on ourselves, our bodies and our clothes will become black.
That which he blamed on (lit. caused to be attributed to) someone else, was done to cover up his fault.
The back
The bolo is behind me.
behind
slip off
The basked slipped from my head
bend
curled up
It can’t be bent
get tired of
The person who is quick to get tired of his work, he will be slow to finish the house he is building
I got tired of waiting for you; I was here earlier.
I've become tired of your conduct of habitual ?? Drinking
tired of
I was tired of waiting for you; I [arrived] earlier
As for the person who is quick to become  tired of his work, he will be slow to finish the house that he is making.
uvula
A person who has a uvula, he is able to talk.
The person who doesn't have a uvula, he is unable to speak clearly and is like a mute.
slip off
You who stood on a log, slipped off
The one who was affected [by his action] -- was directed at -- was her husband who was murdered.
A kind of seasoned, slow-burning wood.
blink
Some people rarely blink their eyes.
Lights likewise also blink
A kind of sugarcane.
fell
When we fell a tree, then we saw up enough for a house.
When the cut field has dried up, finally [the ftrees in] the field are felled.
There are [some kinds of] tree(s) which fall over and then don't sprout.
repeatedly topple
The child repeatedly topples as it takes steps as it approaches its mother.
The only thing left [to do} is to fell [the many trees ] in their field.
They were felling trees today.
finished
completed
When two days of  [this] process has been completed, finally that agkud can be eaten.
You complete the house.
coconut shell bracelet.
Short-legged
Any animal, if it has short feet, it is called short-legged.
Dwarf
A very short person is a dwarf.
First left string of kobbiung.
infection with pus and scabby skin.
exercize self control.
The person who exercises self control when he is attacked is the one who will develop the ability to control himself and then his living situation will be peaceful.
endure silently
I was not able to restrain my anger at that person.
There was a oerson who was attacked by his enemy and was unable to restrain himself from resisting/fighting back.
Restrain yourself
Dam
If there is no dam (lit dam of water), it is not possible to make rice paddies.
dam up
The Liboganon river was dammed up so that it could be used to water the rice paddy.
As for the river/stream which has been dammed up, the body of the water is blocked.
Water which does not flow has been dammed up.
The lake that is dammed up, has no outlet
filled
We will be able to fil upl [our baskets] when harvesting.
If the rain is a lot and then the inside of the boat fills up [with water], it will sink to the brim.
Finally I checked out the fish trap and it was was filled with small fish which were caught in the fish trap.
Fill up the basket with rice.
half
nearly
would
fain
should
It should have been large, but it’s small.
I would indeed like to return to Magimon, but I really won't.
If for example we are doing something but if there is something worrying us, the thing we would have done at the beginning is supplanted  And then we are distracted to something else so that we didn't accomplish [what we started out to do].
Kausing nearly fell
It should have been large, but it’s small.
biting
astringent
The rattan fruit is astringent when we chew it.
smart
sting
If there is stinging medicine which we spread on our bodies, our skin smart.
If you build a fire and blow on it, you will get smoke in your eyes and they will start smarting.
tire of waiting
post
You didn’t spend much time putting the posts, and you were finished.
Groggy
stunned
squeeze
cracked
The waterpole is cracked
Stunted rice
fall over dead.
If we are taken by suprise that a person falls over and goes ahead [and] dies, that is [the meaning of] falling over dead.
Kind of bird
fall apart
separate
Our pelvic bone pulls apart when we give birth.
completely burn a field
stuffy nose
tired of doing
come from
originate
smoke out bees
cut bamboo and remove the knot.
fall out
The dog's fur dropped out.
disintegrate
The posts of the house have disintegrated because they are rotten.
begin
When does the discussion begin?
kidnap
We were nearly kidnapped by raiders.
A river tributary of the Liboganon
vine
burrow
cut
Palm heart
cuckoo bird
return
The water will return
We’ll let the water return
We’ve returned
Intestinal worm of a fish.
break and fall over
The tree broke and fell over because it was rotten.
A kind of bird size of dove
awaken
slap one's own head
Fish palm [tree]
Secondary forest with high, large trees
When [an area] has been cut and [the trees] sprout again and after a long time the trees become old, it has become a secondary forest.
kept awake
Sleep deprived
A kind of rattan
open
Lame
crippled
weak
hair done
Stubby tail or ears of a dog.
angry.
A kind of rattan.
bamboo mouth flute
cut off straight across
A housepost, if it is rotten, we cut it off straight across because we need to remove the rotten part. That is the reason for cutting it off straight across so that it will be straight.
shake water from body
The wet dog shakes the water off of his body.
value
Asat is of great value to me because he is the one to whom I am able to entrust [with my field work].
Fault
It’s your own fault
That is what you deserve for being a child who doesn't obey
What did he accomplish
A rattan woven basket
The very top of the head
Island
Cebu is an island because its edge is all water.
If there is land which is left over by water which has flooded, that is what has become isolated.
The land of Mindanao, because it is surrounded by the ocean, it is isolated from the land.
isolated
leftover section
When the leftover section [is harvested] there will be just one basketful left .
If we have [a part of the field] which we will leave over, we will isection off that good part near the edge [of the field] for seed.
A person says, “Why is this fense [here]” We will reply, “We have sectioned it off for seed
ten
tenth
resh water snail.
bathless
dirty
filthy
Bathe the child who has become dirty.
bridle or halter as of a horse or carabao
A hole in a tree or stump in which water gathers, used as a drinking hole by animals and people.
A span of about two yards; from fingertip to fingertip; 4 dopas the unit of measure of material or beads
Head of grain as of millet or rice
It is a fat head [of grain].
Apusow shoots
cut off.
short-waisted blouse.
A kind of black, short, small-grained rice.
wipe away
stop
small unit
If there are those which we-excl join together, [they are] each a small unit, [or] a satallite
pick up and carry something away
As for the woman, she gathered together her [clean] laundry, collected and took it away ; she removed it and carred it to the house.
When it has become afternoon, we place the chicken basket on the ground and then the mother will go inside and and [her chicks] will be collected.
Not to weed in center of a field
One couple
Something placed here and there
A [unit] used in counting
pick
We will pick just one chupa of ripened red pepper fruits.
The other person was defeated because he picked lansones.
Reach out and snap off something
Why are you staring? Do you expect to snap off a wart?
shed
Left over rice from planting
Smouldering charcoal
Floor ankle length skirt or trousers.
A kind of yellow fish that’s short and wide
A kind of short woman’s bolo.
take
He doesn't want someone to take [some of the rambatans].
obtain
He keeps coming back until he is able to obtain that for which he was asking.
If there is someone who collects payment for a horse but it has been sold on credit, the one who has received the horse can use anything for payment.
When we pick up a lot of mahogany seeds, they are also picked up from the ground because we are picking them up.
There are people who cannot be trusted because they pilfer (lit pick up) my things.
A kind of fish
gun
Kitchen.
Navel
umbilical cord
The center of anything circular
Water which has a whirlpool, also has a center.
Wherever the middle of the earth is, that is the center.
A person has a circular growth of hair on his head which makes a swirl.
bet.
heart.
Ear of corn
The corn will be skinny. The ears will be small.
Banana blossom
produce ears
The others won't produce ears.
White
The abu-on [bird], isn't so white; [it's color] is mixed.
Whiter
whitest
Kind of bolo
metal
5 cent piece
in despair
If we are in despair, even if there is someone to resolve [the person's] feelings, his/her feelings won't be resolved and he/she will think of killing himself/herself
Short
A kind of fruit.
open
A large 2-string instrument like a kuglung
The mature?? iguana, is the same as a kuglung instrument.
How much
how many
How much each? or How many?
Name of a river near Langilan.
A village on the Liboganon river between Dupitan and Bulisung.
Word used to shoo chickens.
catch up
The raiders caught up with him.
To tell something to someone
He told Antonio to tell someone else.
trigger
The pig trap, the noose trap [for a bird] and the noose trap [for a rat], all of them have a trigger which is that which releases the catch.
threat
That was a different kind of threat because she was forced [into marriage].
airport.
Jump up and down
Tea.
under
The [piece of] wood which is a lever, that is the thing used for leverage is put underneath
Nest
woven bracelet
A kind of short cooking banana.
lay a body “in state”
A person who lacks good manners
A person who is uncouth acts inappropriately is what a person is called who doesn’t have [good] manners.  He just chatters [things] which arent good.
speak or act inappropriately and/or disrespectfully.
Don't act inappropriately over at someone's house
To address
You call your father “Amò”.
All domestic animals, [various] creatures, birds, fish (lit. [edible] creatures of the water), all have their names and that is what we use to call them by their names because that is of course how we refer to them.
To call the evil spirits to aid one.
change one’s clothes.
Wealthy in clothing
Buntit has a lot of clothing.
A belt with bells and shells
hunger for fish or meat
We hunger for fish and meat when we harvest.
A kind of white sugarcane that has soft, easy to chew pith.
suffer injury or accident
I suffered injury on an errand when I came across a murderer.
It’s Andì’s fault that I suffer injury when I go on an errand for them and come across a murderer.
Soup
tend
Put down
put away
Put it away now
When we make a [shallow] well, we put sand in it so that the debris will be filtered out.
We place the stone and bee's wax which is used to charm a person on [her] as an armband on her arm or used as a necklace.
When he has married [his wife], he will erase the charm which he had applied |(to her] so that the thinking of his wife will become normal
When he gave the letter [to me], he instructed ) [me] to add to it by word of mouth to insure that [the person] would set aside some corn [for him].
I will destine you to poverty because you did not treat me well.
someone else’s cut hair
I’ll use [the pieces of your hair to lengthen out my own.
Hair bangs.
Soap.
agreement
You will not be able to take the horse unless you have an agreement as to when you will pay for it in full.
Our understanding [of the meaning] is uncluttered, straight and clear.
We are not able to understand
There was something I didnt understand and so I asked what the meaning was.
Those two were in agreement with each other
dance step in which one shuffles his feet
straddle
Bad luck
trap
Even though we warned [that person] not to go to his field to fetch something for them to eat because there was a strong warning, he went anyway and was hit by the raiders. He was shot.
share food
Shared with; we are given a share.
We’ll have Tungonu go downriver in our place.
I'll get someone [else] to tell you for me.
Just one
There's just me
One kind of
As for advice, it is one kind of teaching and correction for bad conduct.
glimpse
The dove glimpses us.
We catch the first glimpse of the moon.
Don't take anything; we'll be seen.
stand still
stop
The child stopped when his mother called.
Stop for a minute
When they heard [that], they said, “Stand still. There is something moaning.”
feel with tongue or fingers.
banana
Short
Whether it is high or short, thick or thin, if it is in the yard and surrounds a house or a yard, it is called a fense.
cover
He can't cover yet
bite aggressively
pay attention
Pay attention to the child who is leaning [out of] the window who will fall after a while.
work as a group
trap
The fish are being trapped by impeding the flow of the water.
Our house was protected from the wate
The library was what impeded [the flow of] the flooding river
compete
stop over
Stop over for a while and drink
There were people who knew me who stopped over at my house and asked for [something] to drink.
intentionally break off
break off spontaneously
A tightly woven tapered backpack
Small flute
refuse to turn one’s head when called
sit or stand with legs spread out
attend a wedding
Illness
Don’t be in physical contact with me because you will catch my illness.
Whatever medicine is effective [against] an illness, that is strong medicine
pain
Uncle’s lung and back pain penetrates all the way through.
hurt
[As for] the old person, he is unable to get around as he walks because his knees are hurt ing.
she won’t use the medicine because it may hurt her.
he person who dove, he happened to bump his head against the rock in the water and his forehead was abrazed and he was injured badly.
bite by snapping
Crocodiles bite by snapping.
grab
now before the rich man could grab a stick.
snatch quickly
grab
He grabs the bolo from someone.
hold or carry
Bamboo water pole
fetch water
If I get home first, you will be the one to fetch water.
ride
slash up into pieces
You’d be slashed into pieces if you were near me.
dip
dip up
play a kobbiung tune.
tree vine having a large leaf
Follower, or subject of someone
If there are those in a some village who are under [someone's] authority, it seems that they are all his subjects.
If it is the decision of the fathr and mother that you make them [part of] your family, they are no longer strangers; [they are] member(s) [of your family]
included
They weren’t included
catch
He didn't catch the ball which was thrown because it passed him but another person was able to catch it
inadvertently happen
When I went  to visit [someone's house], I inadvertently arrived at the same time they were eating. I said, “So you are eating.”
inadvertently caught
When I was on the beach, I was caught by the wind of a strong whirlwind.
A portion of my land was taken away. [He] timed that to coincide with my absence.
A kind of conical fish trap
A large, fat red shrimp with small claws.
brass lime container
pronged fish spear
Wealthy
cross
Her legs were crossing as she was walking
braid
money
A bird similar to purple martin
A red male horse
strain or filter out
We strain out the debris which was in the basin. It is the debris in the water which is strained out
If we make a shallow well on the beach, we place sand there so that the debris will be filtered out.
flee
altar of rattan leaves
rely on
trust
entrust
If we see someone to whom we are related (lit. companion) whom we have not yet met, we feel confident toward him. We feel an openness [between us]. We are able to trust him.
Your trust deceived you.
Niya is of great value to me because he is the one to whom I am able to entrust [with my field work].
There are [some] people who cannot be relied upon who will pilfer my things.
The money from his bambamboo was used up by the person whom he had entrusted with responsibility [to sell it].
We didn't rely on you.
We are relying on Alikas
trip on something
forgotten
He's forgotten to give it to us.
a small black and white spotted  electric eel
have white spots on ones hands
attentive
behind the ear
Green tobacco
Dungus is green tobacco.  It’s name is salingsing.
subtract
His acquaintance subtracted three hundred pesos. The money which arrived,  was only two hundred [pesos].
If he knew that I was having a hard time, he would reduce [the amount] which he would have me pay back.
His acquaintance subtracted three hundred pesos. The money which arrived,  was only two hundred [pesos].
As for the trees, their trunks (lit. bodies) are very big and they were many; they haven’t yet been decreased.
arrive at the same time
Minor may arrive at the same time the plane does.
Round hollow brass bells
trade
There was someone who wanted a fish trap. He asked, “Would it be OK with you if I traded a chicken for it?”
he would lend me two cans of rice grain, and let [me] exchange it for only one sack of unshelled rice.
Wind that [blows] in a circle.
acquainted
slit
unhelpful
You are unhelpful.
altar of rattan leaves
Sap
As for the lawa-an tree, when there is a lump of sap on the lawa-an tree, when it is hardened, that is the pitch which can make a light.
go over the horizon
The sun is setting when  it pases the mountain and goes over the horizon.
something to do with having a spirit
Sing a lullaby
We sing a lulluby to the child
offense
What is my offense?
offend
We offend people
If there is someone who has done wrong, if there is someone who requests mercy or forgiveness, it's not appropriate if his wrong doing is ignored. If you forgive him, [the fault] isn't being ignored.
strap
Splinter
Swift
The cat's hand was swift to claw the snake.
sharp stakes
Arrow(s), or spear(s), [or] a spear trap are that which are used for hunting.
clustered or grouped together
The fruit of the lansones which are thick are clustered together.
zither
flood
When the flooded [river] water has receeded, the thickness of the silt is a handspan deep.
borrow
There is someone who will borrow rice from me
loan
After he used [the saw], he loaned it (lit. caused it to be borrowed) again to another person.
We don't have anything to loan because [we just have enough] left for one meal.
criticize
carry on one's hip
breach
be wiped out
Loneliness.
When you have seen [each other] you tell [that person] that you will sleep together for a while because you have missed him/her
We miss for our companion when it has been a long time since we have seen [each other]. It means we are lonely.
Ten
Tenth
A kind of crayfish having large claws
hook onto
I hook them onto the basket rim
The pig trap, the noose trap [for a bird] and the noose trap [for a rat], all of them have a trigger which is that which releases the catch [on the trigger].
Type of sugarcane.
harvest
There in Maambago there were those who were caused to plant corn. But later on, when it was time to harvest, those who sowed were not able to harvest
curved weeding tool similar to a sythe
bamboo Jew’s harp
do something alone
We’ll go by ourselves.
lose one's balance
You lost your balance (??) If you hadnt happened to sit down you would have ended up on the floor.; You lost your balance.
grow up
Perhaps the people were saying, “So then when John grows up, he/they ?? won’t move when John speaks.”
long, curved knife
example
If for example we are doing something but if there is something worrying us, the thing we would have done at the beginning is supplanted and then we are drawn away to something else so that we didn't accomplish [what we started out to do].
Salt
namesake
steep
Delicious
toe
There was a person whose toes we touching and connected. to each other.
forbid
You take heed when you are corrected.
obey
reprimand
metal band on knife or bolo handle.
Shoes
slippers
Plane
ghost
under one's arm.
The man in the loincloth carried that child under his arm.
overtake
catch up
I was able to catch up with him.
Anna fell behind her companions on the path because she could not keep up because her legs were short.
As for a child, he hurries to keep up with his father as he is walking beside him.
fast, abstain from eating rice.
Now we are separated .  We won't see each other.
cut
There was a person who smoothed off his lumber with which he was making a house.
We chipped off the surface of the luyung in order to make it thin.
stroke or pet an animal
give all
I will give you the whole amount of this my money which is just one hundred [pesos] left.
use something with which to pick up something else
Pick it up with the cloth.
The person who was cooking, he/she took a potholder which which to remove the lid of the pot because it was hot.
Muscle
flesh
Delicious.
pervasive sound
flock of birds.
Bamboo hat
Craving meat because of nursing a baby.
Barbs
stand up
We’ll use Buanbuan for the payment.
When you send me on an errand, Kunsay will be the one to carry it out.
behave in such a way as to upset others
The sabandal person is always upsetting his companion and is a very troublesome person.
anxious
They are beside themselves with anxiety about the raiders.
The pig is the object of concern when someone has died.
type of inedible cane, large
The sugarcane changed into cane.
weave walls of bamboo.
splash,
Toss aside
sow seed by casting
You’ll starve because you carelessly threw away [the rice].
We can just sow the seed carelessly if we have lots of seed.
A kind of large fish.
insult
He/she insulted [someone] because he had not yet
be upset
Don’t you be upset, because I’m still here.
If there is something which has hurt someone's feelings, there is that which makes a person upset because something was said which hurt [that person's] feelings.
skirt
contract an itchy, sore skin disease
The forehead has broken out in blisters.
marry as a child
Benita was a childbride.
give something as a token of appreciation
This is what I’ll pay you for healing us.
commend someone on their good behavior.
Lisanta’s mother is complimented because she doesn’t misbehave.
swing
error
As for [the word] aboy “assumption” one can assume correctly or incorrectly.
You’ve arrived too late, for we’ve already eaten.
dance
The horse trampled his wife.
Praise
Praise your child
do something early
Wash them right away.
We will hurry up to bathe at the pool because there are no people yet.
Skirt.
Beg camotes from Apusow.
I
Now as for me, I’m leaving.
Close together
Her teeth are close together.
red-skinned camote with white flesh.
inlet
An inlet [of water] at the ocean, if it has no outlet, it is an inlet which [forms] a lake.
As for a side stream of a river, there is an outlet downriver.
sharpened slivers of bamboo
We assumed this was [a good place] to pass however there were sharpened pieces of bamboo.
nine
ninth
Kind of bird with a twitter; a quick noisy red bird.
Hang around
A game in which a small arch is set in the ground
metal grate or platform on the hearth for setting pots on
light up
long fishing net
slash with a bolo
prepare to attack
stop
Let's stop for a while because someone has called us.
cross one’s thighs.
stand leaves up along rock used to form a small dam in trapping fish
spark
cigarette
Galvanized iron sheet metal
Kind of round water snail.
kick
That
near the hearer
There’s a pencil near you
Ogmad carried that table on her head.
That talk didn’t hit the mark.
I
me
they
them
he
him
you
to you
for you
stumble over
If the pot is stumbled over it will spill
scoop up
She put her hands in the pot.
have mouth open to be feed,
The hornbill has his mouth open to be fed.
call a person’s attention by calling whsst.
scratch head with the ball of the fingers
Elbow
bamboo stick
steal land from someone.
straighten out legs when sitting or lying.
Have pity on
give
Glance
see out of corner of eye
I glanced at out of the corner of  [my] eye.
burn
be angry
sprinkle
Bright
shiny
The sun is shining in our eyes.
suffer a surface cut
move to one side
Move out of the way.
Set it out of the way here.
We’ll separate out the broken chips.
kind of basket (liang) woven by strands of three and has a pattern on four sides.
sneak up
The python is sneaking up on the chicken.
eavesdrop
have one crossed eye.
belt buckle.
Type of edible shell fish which adheres to rocks or wood.
choke
rise
east
radiate
As for the child whose body is excessively hot, the heat radiates. When we touch our hand to his body it is hot.
sear or scorch
When we are frying something and we put the meat [in the pan], the heat sears [the meat].
When the sun is at it's zenith, if we walk on the beach which is all sand, when we step [on it], the heat scorches our feet which is like being burned.
chip off
If the tooth is chiseled off, it will be easier to pull out
Small, carved wooden spoon.
stay just one night at some location,
a creek with icy cold water.
week
The person who works far away, each week he will return home. The person will return home weekly.
attend church
worship
We worship God.
be obstructed
The sack will bump into and won’t go through if the doorways are too narrow.
The arms will be obstructed by the material if the sleeves are too narrow; they won’t fit.
Red betel spittle
travel
Stop by for a while and drink something -- gracious that you have been traveling in the sun when it is excessively hot!
Black and white striped wild mongoose.
Cats were changed into manggoose.
kick
climb up
lose one’s baby teeth
chopped
become flattened
My bottom has become flattened
Blunt
As if his bottom was wood that it would become blunt.
As for a dibble stick, it become flattened as it is used for planting and so we sharpen it again.
The nose of the pig was flattened because it had bumped into a root.
feed
Pasita fed Tumbasoy because she wasn’t embarrassed.
Feed her the rice.
raise eyebrows as a signal
have hiccoughs
I have the hiccups.
A room within a house or building
Dam made of stones and leaves to impede flow of water used to catch fish and shrimp
A sticky resin
A long-waisted black and white blouse
singe
Now his only work is to do the singeing.
wear something strapped around the waist such as a bolo
The arab knife is rarely used to cut a field because it is just strapped at the waist and worn when one travels in in case there would be an enemy.
When we plant corn, we get a snall basket in which to put the rice and we strap it here at [our] waist.
bump one’s elbow
I bumped my elbow against a chair.
Glisten
weep
cry
The reason she’s crying is because her younger sibling is hungry.
bamboo spear
When we cut down bamboo, we sharpen it because we will make into a bamboo spear.
A cavern or a tunnel
If we go inside a cavern, there will be light in front of us
Game.
meet from
intersect
A kind of basket (liang) woven by strands of two.
thread
tentatively ask
Pinchers
tongs
scorpion
A kind of rattan
have a cold
I have a cold.
be ashamed
shy
embarrassed
If I have a problem, I am not afraid to ask for help.
It will be a cause of much embarrassment to us.
kick
He hunted for something to kick.
buck
To make short, quick, side motions with a bolo on a flat surface
Word used to shoo dogs.
break
be destroyed.
Land tax of 25 centavos or a can of tipaka.
A finger ring.
sweep away
the clothes will be swept away.
We’ll be swept away by a wave of the Liboganon.
whirlpool
Each person in a given group wearing a bolo.
the
an
a
There are many birds of the forest.
What you saw was the house.
this
near the speaker
This is big
Hold onto this camote.
I like this
This water flooded
that
near the hearer
That one.
He will trade a pig for that one.
peer
I’m peeking at the chickens.
this
replace
take turns
They took turns carrying the pig.
take someone's place
It took my place
The big lizard replaced the eggs of the small lizard with her own.
cover or lid
When we slide [the box] portion into the match container, its body matches.
mutual
They have made a commitment  [to each other] because their affections are the same. They have come to agreement with each other. They desire each other. The attraction between the two of them is mutual.
beautiful
floor
count.
bite
enter
They enter the traps now because it’s the season for making kaingin.
catch or get
frustrated
He’s frustrated because he has no chicken to feed to his visitors.
that
far off
We all crowded over there into Lusogpit’s house.
There’s the deer now.
Spear that pig.
ineffectively slash with a bolo or pound rice
You don’t know how to pound rice well
A kind of wood which is used in rice fetish.
split
next
Next month, I will borrow your land.
borrow someone's land
I'll borrow [someone's] land.
War dance with spear and shield.
Cap for a roof
A cap for a roof made of grass, it will soon deteriorate.
There is a tarp which was used as a cap for Ena's house.
The person is making a cap for his house so that it won't rain in.
cold spring
spy
boil
The water has come to a boil already.
Temper
The knife which has no more temper has become raw and cannot be used because it will not cut because there is no more [sharp] edge.
Papyrus
dance kicking one's feet into the air
pinch
dance
a fruit to ripen ahead of others such as a banana on a stalk.
sting
The wasps were disturbed by having water poured on them and then Elena was stung.
Bees sting
ride two on a horse.
Two are riding the horse; one behind the other.
affected
You’ve been affected by manogò.
When I took hold of the matirong fish, I was stung in my hand because it was wounded by the barb and then the lymph nodes under my arm became swollen.
grow an extra finger or toe
But she had her extra finger here.
measure off
Toptop “even” [means] that which measures exactly the same; neither is longer [than the other].
You are the same height
measure each other
The children will measure each other's stone's throw [to see] who can reach the other side [of the river with his stone].
tight fit
I was too big for it.
Someone gave his trousers to another person because it was too tight at the waist and was no longer right for him.
too full
overwhelmed
If we have many concerns, we will feel overwhelmed.
sniffle
sob
Bandiling is sobbing
Strap
go through
leak through.
Pour the blood in a basin lest it leak out
The roof didn’t leak.
The space under a house.
Inside
We also call the inside of this building roomy.
go inside
enter
And then Elena hurried [to put up] the mosquito net and then I got inside so that I would not be stung.
The bees were surrounding the mosquito net which I had entered.
Move in
I’ll move in with the Americans [and] work for them.
duration
My parent-in-law made an agreement with me that I would live with my parent-in-laws for the duration of one year so that I could help [her] with her work.
Many evil spirits entered the house.
Early.
Very early in the morning
We’ll leave early in the morning.
morning
leave early
Did Centinales leave real early in the morning?
regret.
mix
When the boil bursts, the pus will be mixed with blood.
mix together
To make] inagkud, we get corn, rice or some other [ingredient] which is mixed together as ingredients.
[The color of the abu-on bird resembles the color of ashes. It isn't quite white; its [color] is mixed.
go into a weedy or uncut area
Camotes that won’t root but just creep all over.
cough
choke
clear throat
The child’s choking on the milk.
pinch someone’s cheeks
large cheeks.
one's stomach to feel uncomfortable
Fat will make one's stomach feel uncomfortable.
cut off
Cut off the sugarcane at the roots.
blow
He’s blowing his nose.
If there is mucus, he will blow it out.
nudge
If we happen to meet someone on the trail and [if] we are shy, he elbowed us.
A long curved bolo, esp. one with a wavy blade.
crook one’s finger
One unit or whole
One strand
If two people are going downriver [by raft/canoe], and if one gets ahead of the other and  there is one river bend distance between them, he will pursue [the other one] and then he will catch up
Other
another
I'm going to move to another place.
He repeatedly takes away the wives of other people
If my child avails himself/herself of an opportunity to eat at someone else's house, I will scold him/her.
Likewise
Likewise, Asat is also relentlessly pursuing [the possibility of] going home ahead [of someone else].
just as
just as strong
just as bad
one strand
Neighbor
next door
One hundred
Possibly
[It will] possibly be one week. [It will] possibly be two weeks.
One meal.
We don't have anything to loan because [we just have enough] left for one meal.
fifty
a week from today
a year ago
like so
as so
Like she is single, so I’m single
wooden ear-plug
wear wooden ear plugs
block or fill in a space.
Regarding a house which needs to be raised, it is jacked up slowly because it is necessary to block the space
Bad smelling
How smelly are your pinworms
The monkey really stinks.
fill or plug
clog
Use the camote leaves to cover the water tube
Plug cover the waterpole.
Long feelers or antennae as on a shrimp.
sniffle.
put
set upon something
it’s difficult for us
confront.
The word confront means to scold. The mother says, “Why didn't you-pl. help your father?”
A woman’s cloth bag worn on the back
swim underwater
as for people who swim underwater, [they] hold their breath as they swim underwater as they search for fish
immerse in water
The monkey fell in the water
baptize
Push together
push aside
shrivelled
The rice will shrivel, dry up.
branch
Shoots of plants
suffer
Twin.
Ruthie has a twin
hand of bananas.
Pelvic bone
sacroiliac
chew
The alag nut is astringent when we chew it.
Chew the medicine.
cough
Amasig has a cough.
go inside
When it goes inside, the head of the snake enters the hole first.
If we enter into a cavern, there will be light in front of us
The crocodile forced him into an eel burrow. ??
tobacco
we’ll dig sweet potatoes to eat with the monkey later on.
person’s chest.
wade through
fingers and toes
Type of tulaang
A kind of short cogon grass.
Because
Put the mortar under the house lest it get rained on.
She had to sit/ kneel ?? because she was crippled.
Cook rice so that we’ll take some for lunch.
digging stick
sharpened stake which is used as a lever
The [piece of] wood which is a lever, that is the thing used for leverage is put beneath [the log which one intends to move]
pry off or out
try clothing on someone
Try them on the children.
pull
pull the blouse on over my head.
Wear your shoes.
resemble or take after someone.
It resembles it’s mother; it has a red jaw.
shout at the thunder and lightning to go away
The thunder was
send back
travel
We sleep in opposite directions.
You travel to Magimon at a separate time from me
spurn
reject
make something wet
I get wet when I fetch water.
Excessive
He is always turning over because his pain is excessive.
Too much
Extra
There was some extra money left over.
handle of bolo or axe.
To push, pull or ride a water craft upriver against the current
A kind of fish similar to a small bullhead.
grow fast
High water
The river will flood.
The flood of the Liboganon will come up to us.
come together;
She’s clapping her hands.
girl.
pound rice with short, quick strokes to poke around in the ground with a stick
Sudsuron ta ka mundù.
Name of a dance to kobbiung accompaniment.
We’ll dance the sagudsud
give without charge
The meaning of sug-ut is there is no charge for that horse because it was just given [free] to the child.
We can give them a free gift when they return from far off.
We were given a free gift of eggs.
hit the mark.
make or miss a point,
That talk missed the point
The pig wasn’t hit
Hit it when you shoot the arrow.
cook something with water
What did they cook in
What did they cook
They cooked here under the house
put
Put your younger sibling into the cooking pot.
We will build a fire in the middle of the corn field and then we will put those red pepper fruits into the fire.
A kind of long, tubular snail shell used for making lime.
tell a story
We’re going to tell a story about a bachelor.
I’m not going to tell stories.
kobbiung tune.
comb.
stab upward with a spear as through the floor
They spear us up through the floor
Jab
If there are papayas, it’s good to jab them.
The jabbing pole was fitted together because it was extended.
slide
Slide the comb between the shingles
roll eyes
[He] is rolling [his] eyes [up into his head]
We roll our eyes under the lids
Adjacent house
We live next door to each other.
enter a house when the occupants are eating
She happens to come when we’re eating.
place near coals until partially roasted and dry as method of preservation.
When we catch large fish, we just  roast some until partially cooked so that it will become stiff and not be wasted.
be told
exhausted
Branch of a tree;
A kind of large white camote with firm texture.
Large white camote with first texture.
sew with long running stitches
insist
go the long way around, such as to follow a river around its bends
You followed [the river] around its bends.
Round-about
permit
agree
Even though father agree to it; I won’t.
god of the hunt; lives in the clouds; betelnut and chickens are offered to him the night before a hunt.
give orders
If someone gives the order [for someone] to kill [someone else], he will carry out [the order]
You’re bossy
The person commands the evil spirit.
Wood was what she ordered him to get.
sass one’s elders
She’s sassing me.
poke
Poke the rice
We’ll poke it with a ladle.
Horns or antlers
A buck.
hide
Mourning dove
Rattan reinforcement on the bottom of a basket
Rattan is what we use to reinforce it.
in debt
We owe a whole sack.
meeting to decide on a course of action.
collect a payment
If there is someone who collects payment for a horse but it has been sold on credit, the one who has received the horse can use anything for payment.
collector
The collector, that is the person who collects payment for the horse.
I credited your horse first and then the [word] collect [means] that you will ask about the payment for your horse.
I will just be the one from whom you will collect payment
I’ll collect the payment for my dried fish of a long time ago.
cavern or narrow space between two cliffs
transfer
I’ll pour some of your water [into my water tube].
The water came into the boat.
interrupt
boil over
embroider.
I needed an embroidered blouse.
Low platform around inside of house where people sit or sleep
chicken’s comb
A chicken who is ill, its comb darkens.
letter
To write
The woodsy area between a village and the river.
mimic
They mimic us when we talk.
shingle
The cans were used as shingles
pay back
reciprocate
relative.
Cousin
Someone like Emuel, because they have become Ariola, he is [my] second cousin
romp together
look down
We look down at someone without being seen.
When we look down at someone, we are continually seeing the person but we don't let him see us so that we will not be recognized.
go off in a different direction [
stray from a path
As he looked at the writing, he looked at it carefully so that [the meaning] would not be distorted.
digress
Let's not digress from our work.
Fingernail
toenail
claw
hoof
Long ago, our bodies were [formed of] fingernail.
A kind of thorny weed.
Fine toothed comb
A kind of rattan.
clanmate
escape
The wild pigs escape.
attack
They are banding together to attack a certain house.
The women hang around ?? the men.
initiative
combined
If there are those which we-excl join together, [they are] each a small unit, [or] a satallite
My soul rolled up [the mat] and packed it in the basket.
stub one’s toes.
ponder
think about
that is what we should continually ponder.
a person would have to wonder
bump
gather together to talk about something.
To wear a sarong loosely draped over the shoulders as a protection from the cold.
pardon
shout at the rain
The storm clouds can be shouted away if there is a shaman.
The lambus is used to stop the rain.
mock
tease
joke
His followers mocked him so they were changed into trees.
knock
jiggle
shake
mustache
extend
add onto
bump one’s head
The person who dove, he happened to bump his head against the rock in the water and his forehead was abrazed and he was injured badly.
travel against the wind whether on a river, lake, or ocean.
feed
The bones which are left over are fed to the dogs.
We’ll feed it to the chickens.
nosebleed.
feed
Cornerpost of the house.
neighbor
bump into
bolo handle.
sniff or smell
youthful appearance
choke
She’s choking on the water.
spear with a curving spearhead of brass
We may get poked
angry
resentful
He/she is easily upset.
Taganay is resentful.
follow
Follow up the waxing with skating
disturbance or interruption
box or sock
fist fight
I’m going to box you.
Next
following
Next year.
Anuay is Daddy’s stepchild.
the next
following
The week which will follow has already begun.
Crossroads.
take different roads
unit of measure
revenge
confront
If we confront someone, we go to his house and there we will confront  him. The [word] supmat is the same as that you are confronting him because you speak to him.
lid of a basket or cooking pot
suck
As for a flower, its roots suck-up water.
When one is possessed by the spirit, she sucks raw chicken blood.
inform
You inform our companions.
Inform the people at Magimon when there are police here at Mansalinow.
key.
Breast
suckle
The child is nursing.
pestle used for pounding rice.
small edible fresh water shell fish.
liquor
house post.
creek to the north west of Mansalinow, and across the river
The name of a village on the Kapalong river
A stream that joins the Liboganon at the same place the Magimon river flows into the Liboganon.
Name of village
The spirit that governs the relationship between the sexes
Name of a creek between Togop and Banualoy which flows into the Liboganon.
We’ll use the bolo to cut off the wood
Is this our chicken?
become reddish
rust.
Natural state
Old
For a long time
Ever since I was a child, I have always lived in Mansalinao.
answer
reply
We should not give an answer until there is a question.
Tobacco.
A kind of spear
fetch
save
help
spoil
plunder
The guns  were taken as spoils.
They’ll plunder our clothing after murdering us.
cut
Straighten bangs [by cutting}.
A river tributary of the Langilan.
cook
play tag
We chase and tag our companions.
Sawn lumber
To wind
Wind the beads around your neck
entangle
Have them wind each other with red [material].
The middle of the space under the house.
place or put
Put the mortar under the house lest it get rained on.
dizzy
If we are severely dizzy, we will vomit.
As for that [kind of] dizziness, we are the ones who go around, and if we experience vertigo, what goes around is that which we are looking at.
lightheaded
If we are drunk from having drunk too much, we will be lightheaded.
If our blood is lacking we will be lightheaded when we walk and we won't be able to manage to get around.
fat of an animal or human.
gourd.
paper wasp.
borer or carpenter bee.
shave one’s head
red tree fruit
Marmot's mound
The burrows of the marmots mound are connected underneath to the places where they make their nests.
cut up into small pieces
Each
A whole sack each.
Guess
medium -sized knife
Someone cast a knife /sword at hhis companion but it just happened to lodge in 0the wall.
know
I have eaten agkud but I don't know the process of making it.
We will let him know.
Knowledge
inform
I didn’t know that one
I was unconscious  for a half hour before I came to.
wait or delay
He doesn't wait to be told [to do something].
in preparation for a guest
We’ll prepare the food.
lose
fall off
Just one person to ascend at a time.
leave something lying around unprotected.
accustomed.
small bamboo lime container.
A tagan, comes from bamboo and is a container for lime.
kind of bird
Host
hostess
home owners or family of owner.
Host
A kind of bird
meet
intersect
group of smaller stems
Participant.
Tie string of a bolo.
Wood-stem, glossy-leafed plant.
mildew
Cut individual leaves
A person who cuts individual strands of baluy or lunrun grass, uses it to make a pouch in which to put seed rice.
Sharp stakes  or spears
Together with
I took the camote leaves together with the sugarcane and planted them around the root of a stump.
Maggot eggs.
Fast
swift
held up
The rain delayed us.
dream.
temporary
interim
temporary or interim leader
He or she just temporarily stays
We made temporary use of Minor’s house because our house wasn’t yet finished
I’ll use your skirts temporarily.
You start off first.
Kunsay, cut the mat material into strips for me first I’ll weave.
care
She will take care of her child while the mother is working.  She will hold the child on her lap.  Have it nurse.
A kind of black rice.
used to help supply the bride price for another man’s son.
flyswatter made of rattan
swat
clap
slap
use it to swat blowflies.
string of an instument
As for a guitar, it has six strings but a kuglung instrument only has two.
A person who has a kuglung instrument, took bislig ratan and attached [them] to his kuglung.
slender
Owner
Bolo sheath
Sheathe your bolo.
Contents
Bugs can’t get into it
Container
A kind of heron
respect
In our place, we don't show respect [to someone] unless they have been made a leader.
step
take a step
The child took three steps.
when we walk, we take steps.
When we take another step we step down.
Vulgar
ill-mannered woman
Stilts.
finish doing
Endless.
small basket with a cover.
plant one’s spear firmly into the ground
die in childbirth.
Large white bracelets made of hard shell.
musical instrument made of la-ak bamboo, and open in one end;
capsize
The raft may capsize.
climb
steal.
The monkey will steal the key.
The monkey stole the key
thief
That monkey is a thief.
harvest
shake out
Pig’s house.
marmot
The holes of the marmot’s mound is connected underneath to the places where they make their nests
small square woven bamboo basket
female pig
Work
share
They cut the meat up and then divided it nto shares and then they had the person who carried the pig on his back take the head.
They couldn’t share with us
stand up
To have small thighs
A kind of wood.
Black and yellow house lizard
Guardian of the house ties
talk or move in one’s sleep
Buling twitches in her sleep.
locust.
busy
occupied
make a mistake.
confused.
Relationship of one person to many.
You’re only one person but have many books to work with.
Don’t go alone to mingle with a crowd, lest you get lost in the crowd.
Don’t go alone, because there are many raiders.
lizard or iguana with yellow throat
Cowardly.
lazy
necklace attached to ear plugs
tie a small camote on a string as a toy.
center of
Jesus was in the centre of the throng.
camote field
disappointed
I was disappointed since I thought I would be given some.
tiny bird
jealous, as of a spouse
Ear
listen
heed
cross
We’ll take the raft across here
A kind of spear
steward
They see if our stewardship of the rice is good.
failure
If you fail to show up on [that day] of your return, I will expect that what you say is not valid.
But it turned out that he failed to keep his promise and he did not repay the money he borrowed.
A kind of red apusow
Middle
We build a fire there in the middle of the cornfield and put the fruit of the hot peppers into the fire.
And on the highway, there is that which has been placed in the center which also glows.
When it is nighttime, the frog places himself in the center of the eggs.
That which is called a valley in English is a flat area which is between two mountains.
When we ride a jeep from Valencia, when we get to Baguntaas , it is halfway to Nasuli. That is the halfway point of the ride.
This cloth is my cherished possession.
Fast.
A kind of hornbill.
busy
over-occupied
I was over-occupied because I had guests and I had guests who had arrived at my place.  As for my work, I had not completed it yet because there wasnt time. I was taken away [from my work] by my guests.
Gossip.
New moon phase.
What are you keeping secret from me?
love charm
As for a love charm, we put a love charm on a girl if we don't have the courage to ask
As for that love charm, it is put around the arm or worn as a necklace.
We act irresponsible because we’ve been charmed.
unobstructed
The meaning is uncluttered, straight and our understanding [of the words] is clear.
Noisy
talkative
pass through someone else's property
If I carry a fox (caught in a snare) through the rice field, daddy will say, “Don’t pass through the field with that fox; the rice will die if a fox passes through it.
You will go through the field with a fox.
splinter or thorn
Born after father’s death.
Kalara was born after her father was murdered
A kind of leaf that grows from the ground
spider
If there are a lot of dirty spider webs, we brush off the webs of the spiders so that they will be removed. When you brush them off, the debris drops to the floor.
kobbiung tune and dance.
new growth of bamboo before leafing out.
Eggplant.
Vine
Wilderness
Fowl
Stain
sap
It’s stained already.
Limit
If someone desires to get married, he will pursue it. He will continuously discuss it with the father of the girl until he agrees.
Stop with me in your giving; don’t give anyone else than me
There’s no limit to his eating.
Correct
right
doubt
disbelieve
It is necessary that no one will doubt that which he is telling them.
We doubt what the radio said.
We doubt that it will be paid back.
If you are in doubt about your companions, you make them smaller in your hearts.
put something
They will pile the wood on the rack.
Medicine
treat
cave under the water
A kind of dried fish
striped eel.
Musical sound of kuglung.
A kind of watermelon.
Enough.
That’s enough.
bright yellow fruit about the size of an egg
attend.
A sticky variety of bee’s wax from the non-stinging tamusan bee
Small honey bee that makes its nest in a hole in a tree
Watch over
If you won't watch over [the children], go searching for something to eat.
When the mother of a child goes to weed [her field], she leaves her child in the care of someone else and that person watches over him/her.
vigil over
Buntit is keeping vigil over Likanay’s body.
Intestinal worm of fish
insert into
fit together
The matchbox, its body was fitted together.
We fit the lid on the shaft  of the ballpen.
Arrowhead.
Hip
Cut off
Terminate.
I will borrow your saw because I will use [it] to cut off[the ends] of wood.
If the tongue is clamped down on [by one’s teeth], it may become inadvertantly severed.
Igì’s middle finger was inadvertently cut off
When the raft passed through the shallow [water], the rattan which was used for holding it together was chewed off and severed by the stones.
If I am speaking and there is a person who interrupts my speech, he messes it up. If someone overrides [another's words] with his words, it is disrespectful
The [color of the] tail of the kawwilì rat becomes white about midway
We had a saw which was an instrument for cutting off the roofing.
The trees are sawn in portions to be sent downriver.
catch,
intercept
He didn't catch the ball which was thrown because it passed him but another person was able to catch it.
white-ant hill
small, non-stinging honey bee.
spread something out
He spread out the scattered stones as he arranged them because he raked them.
When you make a box, that is where you will cause to spread out the tabacco which you will sprinkle.
We propagate the word of God.
Tall
A tall person is tall.
latch onto
I inadvertently stepped on a centepede which immediately latched onto my foot.
Clamp together
If one is ill and the fever is excessive, his mouth clamps together.
if the tongue is clamped down on, it can be severed.
The girl clamped her teeth on her brother's index finger.
go down
We will be quick to return home because the sun will go down.
The meaning of the sun going down is that it goes over the horizon. It goes out of sight
stop bearing
If she will no longer give-birth, she will stop bearing.
Facing
front
in front of
After that, there was something that just caused to drop in front of us.
confront
If we confront [someone], we go to his house and there we will confront him. The [word] supmat is the same as that you are confronting (lit. facing) him because you speak to him.
And then he was called so that he would face that person from whom he had stolen
She would not give audience to him because she had a lot of work and also [because] she was avoiding  him.
point towards
We will follow the footprints in whatever direction towards which they are pointed.
When we are gathered together there, because we are looking at each other in front of us, we keep smiling at one another.
headband
dible greens.
block off with a fish trap
floor brace.
remove something by pulling it apart or by rmoving nails
slash with a bolo
We’ll get slashed.
Adaw was slashed with a bolo.
fall flat on one’s face on the ground.
stink bug.
abandon
The owner can no longer eat; so it’s abandoned.
Overshoot
If someone is ill, he accuses someone of using poison. He thinks he something was added t]o his water or food].
call evil upon someone by practicing sorcery.
aim one’s fist at the direction from which a dove calls.
fragrant herb used in cooking
swim deeply underwater
The tanob, it just has to do with a person who swims underwater. He is slow to come up for air.
steam
we all
The chief of all of us.
Let’s all of us pound
earth
ground
the world
The dog is digging because he is after the rat in the hole in the ground
We are just temporary residents here on the earth.
The earth is bumpy because it has many mountains.
As for people, they are born ihere in the world
Someone took away a portion of my land.
If they don't have property  [then] they are aliens.
Agot-ot soil is red and gooey. It is used to make clay pots.
Watchful care
The word/custom of watchfulness, we desire  to think about our neighbors/friends who don't have any means of caring for themselves.
We have a mother who is already old who is a widow.  The children are the ones to watch over her to make sure to help her when she has needs.
If the mother is still at the house, [the term is] not yet iggalat leaving her child behind with someone but it is correct to have the child watched over by the older sibling because the mother will do laundry. She is near the house and will hear the child if he/she crys.
Be mindful to give rice to our neighbors.
Someone else whom we should likewise be mindful to give to are the widows who have nothing for their family to eat because  there is a famine now.
show respect for someone who has died by being present at a wake.
dry meat
The horsemeat was dried.
prohibit
transfer from the palm of one person to that of another
I’ll pour the tobacco shreds into your palm.
arrow
An arrow which has barbs, we call a tapi-an
reject something as being too small or insufficient
What we rejected was insufficient because he gave us a chick.
in order
arrange
If the baby in the abdomen has been properly positioned ahead of time, the mother will have it easier when she gives birth.
If we are careful about our conduct, our lives will be orderly.
orderly
well-behaved
In our place, it is necessary that we be well-behaved so that we won't be discredited
When they have become married, he will perform a cerimony to remove the charm which he placed [on her] so that his wife's thinking will become normal again.
We’ll be murdered if we aren’t set straight by the dove.
Mangolian spot
centipede
I felt the sting of that centepede which had bitten my foot.
A kind of black rice.
Beard
whiskers
warning call of the omen dove
The dove called
It’s call was significant to us.
become contaminated or dirty by helping at birth or illness.
give relief or aid
finish
end
As for the person who is making a house, he works hard to finish making it because he will move in.
When they have finished sacrificing the pig, they eat it.
There was a person who cut a field and he was able to finish his work.
Influenza.
tarp
There is a tarp which was used to cap Ena's house.
fish net
Hectare.
pole for a raft
behave oneself.
arrive at an agreement.
Bee’s wax
offer.
fast
hard worker
twist.
lose hope
It is like Ann Joy who was seriously ill. We lost hope because she would not live.
A kind of red rice.
shout in anger at someone.
shake off
hush up a crying baby at night.
catch, or collect anything into a recepticle.
continue a conversation the next day.
Any fruit or vegetable blossom.
belt decoration
itchy toe
carry on
The woman is carrying her water pole on her shoulder.
The person, he is repeatedly carrying wood on his shoulders to use to for building a fire.
close one's lips or mouth
Hold your lips tight together
If a flower has not yet opened, it is still closed.
Nervous talk
shaking
chatter
They’ll make her nervous if they’re noisy.
pour out the last drop of liquid from a container.
tiny-grained red rice.
painful urination.
dive
We dove into the water.
Brat
different fathers
We’re stepsister.
cataracts
eyes have white spots/cataracts
name of a village
constricted
A type of cane
As for the Liboganon river, the cane is thick there in the flad area and its body is hard.
kind of shrimp which has hairs on claws.
tassel or blossom
When [the corn] flowers and bears ears, and if the flower(s) wilt, it indicates  that the corn is being blighted/diseased.
All
All domesticated animals have hips but as for chickens, they don't because their lets are on their sides.
Everyone will pack up and leave because there is something of which they are afraid.
Everyone is crying
When you have all of your payment [in hand], you can take the horse.
Tiba-an ogbukusi ka lison.Both her legs are enveloped.
Was the field burned completely
Exclusively
As for a corn field, that is exclusively corn.
cut off
At the end of harvesting sweet potatoes, when the sweet potatoes are washed in the river, we cut off the roots at the tips
sober up
When a person has become drunk, he will become sober when he wakes up. He will recover; he won't be drunk.
clear up
The sky will clear up; there are no more clouds.
When people have a meeting, and when the meeting is finished, the people leaving for home clear out.
permit something to fully develop or mature
We won’t let the hen develop her eggs.
The eggs have fully developed when [the chicks] hatch.
live
develop
And I have heard recently that they have no children who have lived.  If they frequently give birth, the child just dies.
A chicken egg which is underdeveloped won't hatch because it has not matured.
completed
What she was sewing was completed.
The house which was not finished in the making, it wasn't completed.
What we sew won’t finished.
Our relationship to our companion will develop when our fellowship is good.
he child who frequently fights with another child who is his same age is scolded by his mother who says, “Why don't you treat your companion well? who  hasn't wronged you?”
If he doesn't treat his companion well he will act badly toward him because he will do wrong things to him.
We are not treated well by the people because our advantage  in having wood has gone to them.
If two children have fought with each other, Their relationship won't develop because they are now fighting.
If their relationship is good, their relationship will develop.
abundant
Onions.
get well
Completely
The albino antabun heron has no mixture of design because it is completely white.
do something wholeheartedly.
When we work, we [should] do what we do wholeheartedly.
They totally destroy themselves. The only thing they give attention to is their own bad conduct.
Boiled corn on the cob.
hungry for fresh rice
We’re hungry for fresh rice but it’s a long time yet before harvest.
waken from a trance.
about
approximately
about twelve o'clock.
barely
scarcely
If Jesus just barely blew.
Scarcely had someone spoke
happened to
casually
I just casually helped.
briefly or superficially
He/she briefly looked [at something].
We let them know superficially.
it’s just a bit of fat that he has.
as soon as
As soon as I tried to request something, he gave it to me.
A shallow faith
slash
We’ll get slashed
Strike
Hit
Speech that hits the mark. It boomerangs. People cannot answer back.
pierce
undergo a trial to prove oneself innocent of an accusation
accumulate
involved
I became so involved with my sewing, [that] I forgot to cook supper.
wait expectantly
I was looking forward to the plane’s landing.
correct answer to a riddle.
Meaning.
stop bleeding
It’ll stop bleeding.
The alag nut is astringent when we chew it. It is used to stop bleeding if someone has been cut.
put in order
put
You didn’t put your things in order.
Off and on showers
small bird such as a rice bird
witness to the innocence or guilt of someone
testimony
The water testifies
High
Whether it is high or short, thick or thin, if it is in the yard and surrounds a house, it is called a fense.
raise
If concerning a house which needs to be raised, it is jacked up slowly because it is necessary to block the space [resulting from the lift].
Squat
tiptoe.
When we tiptoe, we step on our toes when we walk.
Measles
If the disease of measles comes to some place, [and] if someone comes for a visit from that place, the disease will be transmitted to us.
clay pot
sink
We’ll sink down in the soft beach.
Embankment
It became a steep embankment because the soil was decreased.
hard or stiff center vein or stem of a leaf
The stem of a coconut tree has a hard center vein which can be made into a broom.
Collar bone.
Knee bead
Small house lizard
Rice husks
bend in river or road.
cut chips out
Cut me off a piece of cucumber
Wood chips.
A kind of sugarcane.
met
acquainted
I have met him
If we see a relative whom we have not yet met, we feel confident toward him.
mouse.
make up to or become friends with people
The monkey has made up to people.
spoiled
The cat is spoiled because it is used to eating sardines.
green heron.
check out
Finally I checked out the fish trap and it was was |filled|with small fish which were caught in the fish trap.
kind of tree fruit, eaten by rats,
I emptied the trap.
Rattan bowstring
Mildewed
protest against anything offending the senses of smell, taste or feel;
We’re offended by the cold.
We offend by our smell
If we’re young, they take advantage of us and give us just a little bit.
get out every last bit of food, or anything, from a container or bag.
Get out every last weed lest it go to weed. If the rest of the weeds aren’t pulled up, they’ll grow up tall.
not be still a minute
Impet’s tail isn’t still a minute
We aren’t allowed a minute’s peace by the raiders.
Thumb
big toe
Middle finger.
A gun
David was shot.
balance
He has a wife on each arm.
Buliung will pole the raft with the old one.
Both of you lift that which is heavy.
uneven
The two beds are uneven because they aren't the same size.
crooked
I won’t sleep even with you
A kind of red rice.
Time
weather
explosive used for killing fish.
Japanese type beetle
Lumpy
This rice is lumpy.
As for soup/gravy in which starch has been added, it will become lumpy if it is not stirred.
The corn is becoming completely lumpy
to taste
To increase
lick one’s chops or lips
cucumber.
Brass arm bracelets
tidbit of food
I’ll let Lubia scrape this from the pot.
To whine for food
Clear
sediment free
Water which is sediment free is also transparent. That which is sediment-free and that which is clear, they have nothing which blocks
particles of food between one's teeth
If our teeth are touching each other, it is difficult to remove the particles of food between the teeth.
If it seems that one has not brushed one's teeth for several days, that's dirty-teeth.
dirty teeth.
toothpick.
When we pick food from our teeth, we remove that which is dirty from our teeth
He makes provision to feed the cat.
run away
Dogs run away with meat.
A dog ran away with it.
He ran away with the girl.
elope
Sabina and Pitikanon ran away together.
A kind of bird about the size of a crow
stick or bar used in weaving
middle-sized red rat with a white tail
The red rat was changed from a red flying squirrel.
strike sparks from flint
The thing struck is a piece of bolo.
We strike the flint against it.
narrow passage between two cliffs
Narrow passage between two cliffs on the Kabungabungan creek.
death blow on the head
If we kill a horse, we give it a death blow on it's head with the back of an axe.
Hit the chicken on the head with a death blow.
Two or more people shoot with arrows or plunge spears into a pig or chicken to insure its deaths.
Plunge your spears into the pig, too.
tackle
pounce
The cat pounced on a green lizard upon which it was preying as it likewise was preying on a cochroach.
cook meat with camotes
We’ll cook the pork with camotes.
The horns on a carved bamboo comb.
reach out and take
receive.
You hold it out, I will take it
The person who feels badly, he will strengthen himself  so that he can endure the difficulty which he has encountered and then he will feel better
keep a store
His brother-in-law keeps a store.
A store
Fourth finger or toe.
Candy.
A kind of banana
test by touching with one’s finger
We test the water by touching it with our finger [to see] whether the warmth is just right.
touch
Touch the monkey
Touch cheek.
Fork
Strong
sturdy
Denim is sturdy.
Light laughter.
Tarsier
jump down.
go on a raid.
Index finger
The girl bit her brother's index finger.
pointer
cut by directing blows at a slant to the surface
Cut pieces out of that wood when it’s dry.
Unhusked rice
Unhusked rice
stay together
Our chickens all flocked around here earlier.
cut off
tip
if the end of the pangi fruit is ripening, it is right for us to take [it] and eat and suck and chew the fruit off of the seed.
Wheat.
A small biting fish
Sugarcane
Sugarcane, that is what is made into sugar and is sweet when added to the coffee that we drink
grieve
black, rotten teeth
Luluy has decayed teeth.
baby laku
fork
a
an
that
It’s good that we’ve found some companions.
Because
It’s a improbable that we will obtain horses since we’re women.
Since
What will we do since it keeps on raining?
Dung
become darkened
When the clouds become black/dark, the sky becomes dark.
As for a chicken which is ill, its comb darkens.
go ahead and do something
The person who is making preparations to cut his field and has gotten six people as tomorrow he will carry out his plan to have his field cut
The person who worked at a another location, he received a message from his wife by cell phone saying, “Carry through to return home to Kapalong next week.
succeed
accomplish
in case
See that the windows are shut in case it should rain.
He won't be able to go down-river because he had work to do.
We were drawn away to something else so that we were not able to accomplish
set out a fish trap
We’ll set out the fish trap.
deliver weak, ineffective blows
If one doesn’t know how to use a bolo, he ineffectively cuts the wood.
beat or whip.
The rain has stopped.
know
Wise
ability
wisdom
howl
Grass
weeds
collapse.
Tuyo-ong’s grave collapsed and washed away.
As for the bank, it was dug out at the bottom and was collapsed and washed away
The last of harvest
Shoreline.
Coconut wine
fight
wage war
bite off
Bite off the tails of the shrimps.
chewed off
When the raft happened to pass through the shallow area, the rattan with which it was tied together became chewed and was broken off by the rocks.
When the rattan became chewed, that is [the meaning of the word] ogkatobtob.
ballad or chanting syle of song.
burn arms with bits of burning kapok to show endurance
Generous.
A kind of mottled rice.
test
Test the depth
Some people are slow to get out of breath when he/she swims underwater and touches the bottom of a deep pool.
That is the person who is able to touch the bottom of a deep pool.
We test a person to see if his conduct is good.Patogkaran nu.
Satan was still thinking about what next he could use to test Jesus.
A kind of breadfruit
Name of a village on the upper Liboganon river between Banualoy and Langilan.
bounce in time to music.
chop sugarcane into short lengths for eating.
A kind of weed with thorny leaves.
term of address to a little girl.
A kind of bird that calls during the dry season.
share
divide up
Stitch
There are six stitches in my gums. Each one was knotted.
sew
What we sew won’t run out well.
Just one betelnut on a palm tree.
side by side
The men cut the field, working side by side.
antidote
Sanglit would have given Ana-ay an antidote.
I said, "I don't know anyone who treats or gives an antidote if there is a hex."
recognize
You were’nt recognized because your mouth was swollen.
If you acknowledge me as your companion, you also have acknowleged Unisimu. The response to this is, “Why shouldn't we acknowledge [him] when [he] is also our companion?”
acknowledge
imply
When there are many grubs which are making a whispering noise, it lets us know that the [grubs] in the palm trunk have broken through [to each other] knotched palm.
If the tassels(s) wilt, it indicates that the corn is being blighted/diseased.
suddenly
There was a day when I was attacked by two wasps which suddenly stung me.
taken by surprise
We are taken by surprise that we have seen someone. We are simply surprised, that's all.
We were taken by surprise because we had not been asked
When we happened to meet each other at the curve of the path, we happened to take each other by surprise. We simultaneously said, “People!”
They cause [the house/village] to be taken by surprise when they have banded together in mass to attack so that all can, without exception, kill everyone.
We were surprised at Amutatoy, that he came visiting at midnight.
rap or tap with one’s hand or a bolo
cover
blanket
burp
After one eats, one burps.
scream.
Three
Third
expect
We are expect that the plane [may come] tomorrow
The woman didn't expect that those words of her male-companion would be fulfilled that he would return on that day.
discern
The woman said, “Because you did what you said, I discern that you are not a liar.”
Because she heard her name mentioned, she discerned that someone had spoken badly about her.
ve found you out.“What is your secret about me?”
predict
Stay
The child who is wiggley can’t sit still
Stay put
One person will stay with our things
The child said, “Uncle, my father is staying in the house
dry near a fire
I dried [the fish] near the fire so it wouldn’t get wormy.
live
Why are you living there [on the ground] when you have work here?
add on
I’m adding to my skirt.
The steps there, they were extended because they were narrow at first.
short arm shield
kindle a fire
When I kindled a fire with wood that has been ignited with fire, it was ignited and became coals.
If you build a fire and blow on it, you will get smoke in your eyes and they start smarting.
The person, [he] is repeatedly carrying wood on his shoulders to use for building a fire.
The hearth which is a place where a fire is built, it becomes grey when we cook.
Chopped off
stubby-tailed animal
There is a person who marks his piglet, he will cut off [part of] its tail.
There was someone who cut off [a piece of wood] which he would make into a single mortar.
Someone who is cutting lengths of langilan wood for a roof.
When we cut [something] into lengths, we just repeatedly cut them short.
Black
connect
come together
If you cut a field on the other side of a mountain and go up over the top [where] there is another field, the fields joined each other. They have come together.
When there is a meeting, [many] people come together and see each other.
If there is someone who will come from Kapalong for a visit, [he] will have us meet him at the junction [of ??] so that he can find our house so that he won't get lost
hey didn't join [the fields] by cutting
David and Goliath, they came at each other when they fought each other.
The bones haven’t grown together yet.
herald
The dove is a herald
If our companion is carrying something heavy, we will come alongside to help.
A torch
I did that because I who had been first to fish by illuminating the water with a light was being illuminated
I was using a light to fish for small bullhead fish in the Liboganon River.
There were those who followed me who were also fishing by illuninating the water with a light but they were using a Petromax lantern for illumination.
half
Those beetles are the same size, one and a half inches in length.
If for example [there is] a sack of rice, [if] you tell a person, "Divide it in half" he will take half.
He didn't allow [him] to take half of those piglets.
Halfway.
When we rode a jeep from Valencia, at Baguntaas it was halfway to Nasuli. That is, it was in the middle of the ride.
Boundary
As for people who have land, if there is a creek, they will make it to be their boundry.
Lift up one’s head
drum with fingers
pull head back by yanking the hair.
I’ll yank your head back after a while.
rap with knuckles
Rap on the kobbiung.
about
with respect to
The person said, “About the debt of the Kapugi people, it was a long time ago.”
The chief said, “With respect to the debt of the residents of Kapugi, that debt has nothing to do with Maambago.”
What reason do you give for this current theft of yours?
wrap up
enfold,
encase
surround
The membrane encases the white of the egg. And the white of the egg surrounds the yoke.
As for its pupa, its dwelling place is encased.
The Manobo people, when they carry a lunch of rice, they wrap it up with a banana leaf.
jiggle or bounce
stare
The neck at the base of the head.
point with the fist in the direction of significant dove calls.
We point at the dove’s call.
Hone
traumatized or immobilized,
At the time that someone was drowned at the pool, there were many who were aware who were weren't able to go to the rescue. They were stymied and unable to move.
The people who were at the pool when their companion was drowning, they were stymied as to what to do in order to rescue [the drowning person]. That is why they were immobilized.
put together
Put your things together; they’ll get lost.
here were [some] people who were putting shelled corn in a sack and they were packing it down with a pestle to compress it so that the corn would be tightly compressed in the sack.
Snug
put medicine leaf on a swelling or pain
Payow leaves are put on.
walk single file
descend to the river from the mountains.
padded hips of a monkey
silenced
The people will be silenced
Sugarcane pith.
cut the edge of a log
That wasn’t cut off carefully.
Cut the edge smooth.
Even is that which measures the same; neither is longer
shake out, as a rug or a flour sack
Flour, if we shake the flour sack, it will become dust because [the flour] becomes airborne.
crush between the thumbnails
I crush the lice between my fingernails.
head covering
A hat is also a head-covering but it has a name.
He’s covering [his] head with a banana leaf.
Old
mature
hemorrhage
Kapok is burned on my arm.
spin or whirl fast as a propellor
resist being cut
The wood resists being cut; it’s solid.
by surprise
The only suffering which you can be ignored is that which takes one by surprise because it seems there is a difference between that which is ignored and that which is endured
startle someone
startled
stretch or hold out one’s hand
bark at
The dogs will bark at us.
bridge
approach a house when the occupants are sleeping
They wait until we’re sleeping before they come to shoot us.
Medicine.
wiggle one’s scalp.
Year
Yearly
Now is the beginning of the year
We’re cutting our fields now.
When we plant yearly fields, we go to see how the corn fields are.
tree stump
point out
Someone saw honey bees and he pointed them out to his companion.
A person points out by pointing a finger that there in the mass of twisted vines on the of the branch is where the bees have adhered.
My uncle had [me] point out where to cut.
I showed him a portion of secondary forest which to cut.
The one being pointed out  is Jesus.
Someone will ask, “Where is the eating place here?” And then we will point it out [saying], “The eating place is on the other side.”
refer to
The expression doesn't mean that one's love is lacking, it refers to the fact that a someone feels very sad
As for that, it refers to different kinds of fish.
Successful
beautiful
large
well-built
She isn’t a nice-looking woman
If someone is bitten by a snake, there is also a little known remedy which is used as a treatment for the snake bite. It is called little known because only a few people know about that medicine.
We’ll point out the chickens to her later on.
pull or yank
It hurts if the hair gets pulled.
believe.
As for the person who doesn't believe a warning that there are raiders, he will be ensnared by something bad because he will be murdered.
You are able to believe something when you know about it.
true,
real
Mary wasn't a true foreigner because she mearly slept [somewhere] for one night.
As for a step-father, he isn't the real father.
one has to prove whether it is true that someone was poisoned
I am checking [to see] whether that which I I have heard is true.
You should to find out the truth of what you say.
Purpose
intention
Your intention is bad.
meaning sense
the word aku, is not the same as atu. The meaning sense is different.
come for
What did you come for?
roast over a fire
I’ll roast the corn over a fire and even the crabs are good that way.
kind of shrimp.
own
If a person asks when [a couple] was married, someone will respond, they were just married yesterday.
After the man and woman have fed each other, they have become a couple, they have married each other.
After the discussion, the wedding is begun. That is the decision that they get married.
His own full younger sibling.
predict
It’s our fate to have dreams predict misfortune for us.
mark
As for a person who has a good place to cut a field, he will mark it so that no one else  will cut it.
The wooden crosspiece which marks [it], that is the sign that there is an owner.
Your dark blue umbrella which you forgot to retrieve from another house, it has been neglected That is the meaning of a fixed object, it isn't paid attention to. It becomes permanently forgotten.
Cook by boiling
Cook the pork by boiling
lounge
lie around
bamboo flute.
drink from a water pole.
I’ll drink from the water pole since there isn’t any dipper.
pour
wear one’s hair straight back from the forehead
Used of being reunited with the soul
The soul hasn’t yet been reunited with the body; it’s bad luck
plant used for fish poison.
nonpoisonous leaf used for putting on swellings and aches.
pray or sacrific
The chicken is bled on the altar.
remain living in the village
poisonous vine which is used both for poisoning fish and for committing suicide.
Any kind of taro leaves
A person who makes a recipe from the taro plant, grates coconut with which he makes coconut milk
dark spot on baby’s sacroiliac.
Tobacco
palm
eat
Let’s eat now.
plant with a stick
Joint
Abundant foods.
We have plenty of food now.
sprout
grow
The edge of the river which is flat in which reeds grow, that is soft soil ground.
Center post of a house
sleep
produce
flourish
As for agot-ot soil, corn will not flourish [in it] The corn will be skinny.
It didn’t produce for us.
A bird or animal used as a decoy
To ride the current, coast through rapids.
Kind of camote.
The wings are beginning to sprout feathers.
Junction of a river
The water of a side channel flows through and joins  the body [of the river].  It is called the junction of the rivers.
Struts
chose to stand rather than sit when talking.
Unable to bend knees.
bird
horned lark
loosen
If the cotton loosens on the loom, it can’t be done.
Don’t loosen your arms; hold them out tight.
get married as a child.
It’s bad to marry when still a child.
Benita married as a child.
Palm heart.
eat from the same leaf
Don’t eat from the same leaf; eat separately.
leap over
If we are burning a field and there is stong wind, there will be a lot of live embers which will leap up and over to another mountain which will also be burned up.
biting worm
awl
I’ll borrow your awl if you have one.
pluck
Start plucking!
drink from the mother medicine that the mother has taken and which is in her milk.
The child will get the medicine from it’s mother’s milk.
give money or clothing on credit to someone who probably won’t pay for it.
You gave to Sob-ul, doubting if she would pay for it; instead she really has.
fitting
convenient
adequate
suitable
Red suits you.
The blanket is convenient for body lice because it’s fuzzy.
attach
If rattan is used to sstring (lit. attach by sticking [with a needle]) the beads, it will easily (lit. quickly) break if it gets wet with water.
The blanket is harbor for body lice because it’s fuzzy.
take effect, as a medicine
sent
You were invited.
I sent for him.
place an order.
large water heron or bittern
string as beads
We are stringing beads.
remove a thorn by scraping or pressing
A needle is used to remove thorns.
Thorns are scraped off.
put the ladder out from the house so dogs or children won’t enter.
Temporary shelter
The people will sleep on the ground who are making shelters to sleep for one night.
side beam
walking stick;
Make a walking stick of that tree.
prop
touch
When a dog sits, all of his feet touch (are propped on??) the ground
top border of a basket
I’ll put the edge on the mat.
satiated
Satiated on meat.
peck
To spear
Gizzard
Immature pangi fruit
Straight
correct
The meaning is unobstructed, correct and our understanding [of the words] is clear.
sing a story
Burp
The child who nurses and doesn't burp, it will happen to vomit up the milk.
pay
water trough or sluice
Wood used in making a hearth frame.
Use it for making the hearth.
The hearth frame was burned.
choose for oneself
A huge fish or long teeth
good character
Good character/patient?? In our place, if he is having great difficulty, he always supresses his feelings and doesn't quickly revenge. He is very patient.
Ear wax
grow
rise
charge interest
And then what he will ask is, [whether] if he is able to borrow one thousand [pesos], if perhaps he will charge interest
yeast
The paper will tear raggedly.
The halves of the papaya divided unevenly.
slice
strip
circumcize
A lone tree standing
wood or debris left behind by water
cook by boiling in water
The liver wasn’t cooked by boiling in water lest it would fall apart.
Cook the pork by boiling
tell
relate
recount
take hold of and push
Push the raft
accompany or deliver something partway
iny house too small for the number of occupants.
Night insects
musical sound of the kuglung.
stop by and pick up
He will stop by and pick up
These two were picked up enroute. They were brought along.
bring something along
brought another tree with it when it fell
We’ll pick them up along the way.
Pound rice with someone
We’ll pound the rice together.
Help me pound the rice.
pass through, as water leaking through a pot
It drips through the pot.
The rain dripped through on the rice.
Body louse
meeting of men
It’s only our meeting; don’t you women come along.
The largest in a litter.
carry out
If someone orders someone else to kill somebody, he will carry out
respond to an invitation
I’ve come in response to what you said, “You [come on] Monday.”
fulfill
small abaca-harvesting knife.
red eating banana.
messy hair
Their hair was messy from the rain.
swollen bruise on the forehead.
arrange neatly
The books aren’t put away neatly yet
arrange neatly
The material has been put in order.
privately
To ask privately.
shrew
nod one’s head in agreement.
bump one’s forehead or knee.
We bumped heads.
Chicken’s tailbone.
eat by oneself or to serve oneself
Why are you just serving yourself [alone] and not offering any to your companions when they’re hungry?
privately
To ask someone privately.
red mites
The flat places are full of red mites
The cats have red mites.
furry stemmed and leafed tree.
firefly.
kind of tender fungus
obbiung tune and dance.
be greedy
gluttonous
eat a lot
The monkey eats an awful lot
swim or float downriver with the current
leaf out
The bunduy tree is leafing out now
drift back on someone
curse
We’re cursed [by being dreamt about] so that we will die.
The person who has been robbed of possessions and money, he curses the person who has robbed him by [saying], “You person with bad conduct should die.”
melt
Even sugar and salt will melt.
lower down
The coffin is being lowered
is hanging down.
arrow
Nails.
patch
The cloth will be patched.
I’ll use the scraps for patching
There was a person whose clothing was torn and so he patched it by sewing on [a piece of] material.
Add onto
As for your old attitudes , don't add them onto  your new attitudes
cause someone to pay attention
plant corn
Cornfield
corn field
As for the fruit of the red pepper, it is a big help if we have a corn field which has a tasikan blight/disease.
Unaccustomed standing
smoke out bees
corn field
When we plant yearly fields, we go to see how the corn fields.
Doubtful
improbable
It’s improbable that we would get it since we’re women.
mash or pulverize.
loosen
Put out of joint
Our shoulders may be put out of joint by carrying a heavy load of waterpoles
aim
When we aim [a gun] at a bird, and when iwe have sighted  it [we] shoot the gun the and then [the bird] is hit.
burn
There was a child who burned down their house.
Before I burn it, I pile up the wood.
burnt
Ashes come from fire when there is something that is being burned.
firstfruits thanksgiving ceremony
We’re going to start harvesting rice today.
The thanksgiving ceremony, that is the beginning of eating rice which is presented to God.  [Someone] kills a pig and chickens.
travel downriver by raft
lead by a rope
refuse to eat, drink or move
Impette wouldn’t eat when you were gone
[The umbrella] will not be attended to, it will be disregarded, it will be left in a fixed state.
fixed state
River near the Agusan Davao boundary.
People of the Umayan river area.
Edge of the waterfall.
tip
The bark of the lawa-an tree was loosened all the way to the tip [of the tree].
A person asked for the tips of the camote leaves and he cut off the tips of the red pepper leaves.
chew and suck on
The children are chewing|and sucking on on the sugarcane.
crow.
monkey
White hairs
The cat has white hairs.
lie
deceived
Your were deceived by that which you trusted.
make-believe
Your lie
A camote-like tuber with climbing vine
Palm heart
Are you going after ubud?
white breasted dove with red head.
When the ubun-ubun dove calls it says, “bagu-bù, huun, huun, huun.”
use up
The person said, “Don't continue because there is no rice in Patil because it has been consumed.
The money earned from his bamboo was used up by the person whom he had entrusted
She would say that her rice will be wasted because she cannot finish weeding
When the owner is about to begin harvesting his field, then he has many people helping him so that in about three days they can finish harvesting it.
All without exception
They cause the house to be taken by surprise when they have banded together in mass to attack so that they can kill all without exception.
hey will attack a house and then they will completely kill off
Even though the people knew that I was the owner of those plants, they totally cut down all the bamboo which I had planted.
One wouldn't say the Liboganon River was at high tide unless all of the flat area has been completely covered by flooding.
Camote or corn which has been chewed on by a rat
The camote has been chewed by a rat
Exhortation
advice or teaching
As for advice, it is a type of teaching or rebuke for bad conduct.
As for a  person, he teaches good conduct to his offspring.
He commanded his sister, “Come here.”
dump
The people who digs sweet potatoes, will dump the sweet potatoes into the water because they will wash them first.
When soup spills, the contents fall out
The mouth of the container is made to be narrow and has sharp points so that when water-creatures go inside, they cannot drop out.
When he has finished dumping the rocks, they fall
vein
artery
nerve
She has no veins yet.
As for the person who has many visible veins, his veins can be seen because they protrude
stringy
As for a stringy camoty,  it isn't seen until it is cookedl
begin a speech or discussion.
well-chewed chunk of tobacco.
Albino
The albino  antabun heron has no mixture of design because it is completely white.
Place
location
country
I'm going to move to another location.
If that place is abandoned, there will be no more people whom we will  hear talking.
If we move to another country, we are just aliens.
The person who is making a house will work hard to finish making it because he will move in.
scrape rattan to make tyings.
live somewhere
The abu-on is a large bird which lives is the forest.
I will chose a wider house if no one is living [
stay
If your stay is long, that is “alien” because you have joined [them].
living situation
But if there is a means of defense, we who are living there won't feel insecure because our living situation will be secure
The chickens are all lined up on the roost.
swim deeply
The person who is slow to get out of breath is the one who will swim deeply underwater in a deep pool.
deeply affected
A destitute person who is always being scolded, when [the criticism] affects him deeply emotionally so that he can no longer endure it, he will have to react.
Move forward
You move forward and I’ll move back a bit
Move up
A person who climbs a tree always moves upwards.
The fare of transportation has increased.
rise
increase
As for a thermometer, the fluid (lit. water) in it falls orrises toward the top.
noon
It's noon
When I had a tooth extracted, I wasn't able to eat at noon.
Middle of night, or zenith of moon
The moon is at its zenith.
We were invited by Vivian to eat lunch
lunch
hull
To crow
Chickenpox.
The child has contracted chickenpox.
strip off
If we eat something that still has a bone, we bite into and chew [the flesh] off until it is stripped
A kind of bird
chew on a bone
Impette’s gnawing on a bone.
dump out
I dumped out the corn; it was no good.
The cat tipped over the sugar.
face of a person
song style used to tell a story
undergo a change of circumstances
From now on, you, my oldest children, won’t have any change of circumstances; I’m handing you over to poverty.
You’re going to suffer a change of circumstances tomorrow when your companions aren’t here.
scream
She’s screaming on account of the child; it’s about to faint.
You screamed earlier on account of the sugar.
Fearful,
afraid
peckled chicken
shed, as a skin or soft shell.
The skin of something like a snake which is periodically shed
put aside or discard
The feathery chicken discarded her young when she was about to lay again.
We’ll finish drying the rice
kill
destroy
slay
The domestic pig will be killed and eaten when it’s old and weak.
The evil spirits will devour you.
A kind of wood.
Name of a small weed
stalk of bananas
That which is planted, like corn, rice, monggo beans, and ulibon grain, those are what are planted because we drop [the seeds] as they are planted.
grain similar to rice
Charcoal.
annoy
bother
As for animals, they don't bother people.
A rooster will peck [us] if we bother their chicks.
There is someone who gets annoyed by the children if they are playing
If you are worried about something, you will be disturbed if somone asks you
repeat the exact words over and over
There is someone who reads something over and over so that he/she can memorize it.
That which we-excl. learned as we attended the seminar, we likewise will repeat that which we know to the people  to whom the hand-operated [players] will be given.
Wherever the first wound was, that is where one will repeat the action of spearing.
return
He fetched the saw and returned it to me.
As for that saw, it was a year before it returned to me because it ended up in Kapugi.
reimburse
I'm going to reimburse Ivy's shoes
I'm going to ask how much she will have [me] give her in return
If we are guests, it depends whether we tell the host how many days before he will let us return home.
I will not let them return home
They are fetching camotes from others.
Any kind of  shrimp or crayfish.
Bite off the tails of the shrimps.
Snake
Head
The one who will claim the head is the one who carried the pig on his back.
Top leader
chief
fall
My daughter, Jeany, fell from a santol tree.
At the time that [she] fell, it was five o’clock in the afternoon.
If the pangi fruit has just fallen, it is not ready to take.
A person fenced in the base of the durian tree which was bearing fruit so that no one would have his fruit fall on him.
dropped
There are children who eat and then there is a lot of food which is dropped onto the floor.
We repeatedly drop the seed which we are planting.
When ghosts try to scare us, at first they say, “Mmm.” After that, they make things drop in front of us.
Antonio testified against my uncle.
to testify
Slow-burning
Polì wood is slow-burning.
He/she doesn’t stop
Don’t stop getting shrimps.
He’s a child who doesn’t stop
That is the person who is talkative who is continually speaking, the one who doesn’t hesitate to speak
lay one’s head on something
He laid his head on the rock
When you lay down, lay your head here.
round reddish-brown seed of a vine
small wooden pole
We hold onto the pole by which we’re tried.
The pole is held onto.
Come
If an illness comes to some place, [and] if someone visits from that place, the illness will be transmitted to us.
Even if we’re reached by murderers, nevermind because we’ll just endure it.
Before the famine reached them, Boybayan went after wild camotes.
The famine arrived.
reach some place.
This money is enough for you to reach Davao.
occupy or pay sole attention to something
The only thing they pay attention to is their doing bad
She is absorbed in her praying so that her good thoughts will continue.
There is no one to whom he shows favoritism; [he treats] everyone equally. There is no one whom he belittles.
Now what do you know about this!
Oh, how strong was this crocodile
come up close behind another person.
smother
The child will smother if it gets covered over with the cradle cloth.
fat
obese
call
Call me.
My relatives who were flooded in the middle of the night, they were always repeatedly calling, “You-pl, help us because we are going to drown.”
cluster
One cluster, that is just one grouping
gentle and of good character
constantly
always or frequently
If someone wants to get married, he will pursue it relentlessly. He will constantly discuss it with the father until he says yes.
As for that person who is persistent, he keeps coming back until he is able to get that for which he was begging.
When it had been a long time and he was repeatedly stealing, it became known by the people that it was true that he was the one who had taken
Always
continually
He’s always laughing because he has no companions.
You’re always lying to us.
guitar pick.
make an effort for nothing
You made that effort for nothing  because you weren’t able to get any cloth.
Same
They will be the same.
Make them just alike.
There is no one to whom he shows favoritism; he treats [everyone] equally. There is no one whom he treats as less.
large
huge
bend
Your red rice is bending over.
feed a fire
Feed the fire under what’s cooking.
Keep stoking the fire because we’re hungry.
be the one’s to do something
You be the ones [to talk] now.
You be the ones [to discuss it] with her first.
You be the one to choose it.
visit for the first time
We’ll go and see Maria.
Now, for the first time, the plane has come to us.
ride
on board
Will you put this on board?
Vehicle
experience
We are experiencing good things.
tell a secret
Life
breath
Our life is short.
follow the very same path as another
Pattern your behaviour after his.
follow the very same path as another
imitate
emulate
There is that which is good to envy, if what our companion is doing is good, that is what we will emulate.
Emulate me in my thinking and behaviour
Their conduct is in accord.
we look someone up and down. We look at them from top to bottom or bottom to top.
grow or develop
The baby is developing
There are blotches on the [body of a] child when he/she is two weeks old from the time of birth . Theydevelop from his/her milk. The blotches just go away when he is older
include
He included him in the fault. He included those who weren't involved.
grasp hold of
stick used to hold onto when undergoing trial in the river
hen
kind of bangkawan used to carry a wild rooster
Bald
chewed betelnut.
Give me some of that betelnut you’re chewing.
surround
We’ll be surrounded by raiders if three people delouse us at once
We’ll surround the wild pigs.
stymied
The people who were at the pool when their companion was drowning, they were stymied as to what to do in order to rescue
If there is a person who has a fault/sin whom we are arresting, we say, “Don't resist because you have no recourse because you are surrounded.”
top of a shield
Rain
If the the [amount of] rain is a lot, the inside of the boat will be filled
Hurry and fetch water because it will soon rain.
If the rice is rained on, it will be ruined.
A person caps his house with a long grass so that it won't rain in.
If it is rainy season for two months, the feet of the people will get a fungus infection if they don't have shoes.
The brightness causes it to rain.
love song style.
suitor
fiancee
apologize
If I have a guests, I will apologize that I have to leave  them here at the house.
No matter how much money you are short , you are the one who will decide how much money to give to me
When one takes leave, they let someone know that they are going now.
hour
slave
Those whom we call as slaves are the ones who are always made to work. They have a hard time.
A person who is a slave, he is a servant who is made to suffer by his leader [who gives him] lots of work.
servant
Like a servant of God.
one person says, “You are actually a slave.” I will respond, “Yes indeed because I am his pangabaga “representative”
fawn all over someone
go upriver
walk upriver
I'm sending a message please that I will travel upriver to Maambago.
The flood of the Liboganon will come right up to us.
In the future.
I’ll return in the future, about two years from now.
Gold
Noodles.
slide down.
If someone climbs that bamboo which was stuck in the ground which had money put on the top, he would slide down because it was slippery.
deer.
shake grains
Shake out the rice.
swing by one’s hands from a tree vine
enemy
The armed men are very many who attack their enemies.
despise
hate
enmity toward
The girl's thinking will become good and she will think about her family but she will despise her husband.
If a person who is jealous cannot steal, he will hate us and his view of us will be bad.
As for a person who is angry, he/she hates [someone]and he will be at enmity toward his companion.
I hate of him
Dark
benighted
overtaken by darkness
You’ll be overtaken by darkness
When the sun sets, it begins to become dark.
Don't continually be staying out late at night at some other house where there are young unmarried ladies.
Term of address between men.
surface dive.
shove
push
a person who manipulates, she adjusts the child with her hands but just presses gently.
debt
If there is a person who wants to borrow money, he will discuss it with the one from whom he will borrow
And then what he will ask is, [whether] if he is able to borrow one thousand [pesos], if perhaps he will charge interest
Let me have a bolo on credit.
Don’t give the clothing out on credit.
clear
Clarify it.
Clarify what you said
swing
brain.
catch
No matter where he may catch a pig, he endures carrying it on his back.
penetrate
My bolo won’t cut.
many
much
loads of food or clothing
There’s a lot of this rice.
carry on the head
Carry the things on your head.
roll over
The mother may roll on the child.
layered as one coil on top of another.
The snake lies curled up with [the layers of its body] coiled up one on top of another.
Term of address to a boy, or a fellow younger than oneself.
steam
let out or escape
Lance the boil so the pus will escape.
express
I'll express something because here’s something I’d like to have from you.
We’ll be burned by the steam.
Their bodies are destructively affected by what they do
abandon
The man left his wife and four children. And now, he has abandoned his wife and children
Term of address used by a husband to his wife
to make alive
cure or heal
watch over
I’ll watch the cooking.
I’m your housegirl.
take care of someone
And then when [the woman] gives birth, that is what is used to help as the hands of the midwife are caused to accompany
Guardian
He has a steward who is the guardian of the plants and that is Kalayag.
agreed
unanimous
consistent
We’ll get the girl to agree who doesn’t want to.
You make your talk consistent with ours.
Stiff,
The arm muscles are stiff.
One of the first Atas
Mouth
guard
protect
struggle against restraint
A horse [tries] to throw the one who has mounted it so that we will fall off.
A bird that talks at night
give something
give a portion
Give the portion to Brother-in-law.
An orchid.
broom
hide the truth in order to deceive.
struggle to free oneself
Eight
Eighty
backbite
If there’s any more scandal about you, you’ll be sold.
lance or open a boil or injury
Lance the boil so the pus can escape.
None,
not
lost
missing
nothing
deny
no more
Nothing is missing
No manners
The person who is uninhibited/unrestrained, we refer to as [one] who has no manners.
lack love
dislike
not care about
axe
Swollen jaws due to bad teeth.
expose or uncover
Clear the doorway so I can pass through.
Uncover the rice so it can dry out.
Water skippers that glide over the surface of backwaters or still pools.
Not.
Not quite
Not yet.
inappropriate conduct
offer
repeat the speech or words of someone.
move around.
The piglets take turns moving around
wiggle
Your intestines continually wiggle when it is empty
When the bodies of the grubs wiggle, they likewise squirm
The mother's stomach moves involuntarily
If we inadvertently brush against the table as we pass, it is jostled because it was moved
At the time that someone was drowned at the pool, there were many who were aware who were weren't able to go to the rescue. Others were stymied and unable to move.
Water
river
stutter
A stuttering person is slow to express [his words] because his words repeatedly snag.
As for a person who stutters, his speaking is not straight.
moved by current
When there is a tree which moves there in the rapids that is a tree that is moved by the current.
Mosquito larvae.
A kind of nightbird
And
before
or
[As for] the raider(s), sometimes there are six, five or four people.
lean away
We just lean away from something because there is that which is smelly.
bounce
cradle
small hairs
We get goose pimples and the small hairs on our arms stand up.